CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
1
Truth in Lending Act
The Truth in Lending Act (TILA), 15 U.S.C. 1601 et seq., was enacted on May 29, 1968, as title
I of the Consumer Credit Protection Act (Pub. L. 90-321). The TILA, implemented by
Regulation Z (12 CFR 1026), became effective July 1, 1969.
The TILA was first amended in 1970 to prohibit unsolicited credit cards. Additional major
amendments to the TILA and Regulation Z were made by the Fair Credit Billing Act of 1974, the
Consumer Leasing Act of 1976, the Truth in Lending Simplification and Reform Act of 1980,
the Fair Credit and Charge Card Disclosure Act of 1988, the Home Equity Loan Consumer
Protection Act of 1988.
Regulation Z also was amended to implement section 1204 of the Competitive Equality Banking
Act of 1987, and in 1988, to include adjustable rate mortgage loan disclosure requirements. All
consumer leasing provisions were deleted from Regulation Z in 1981 and transferred to
Regulation M (12 CFR 1013).
The Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act of 1994 (HOEPA) amended the TILA. The law
imposed new disclosure requirements and substantive limitations on certain closed-end mortgage
loans bearing rates or fees above a certain percentage or amount. The law also included new
disclosure requirements to assist consumers in comparing the costs and other material
considerations involved in a reverse mortgage transaction and authorized the Federal Reserve
Board to prohibit specific acts and practices in connection with mortgage transactions.
The TILA amendments of 1995 dealt primarily with tolerances for real estate secured credit.
Regulation Z was amended on September 14, 1996 to incorporate changes to the TILA.
Specifically, the revisions limit lenders’ liability for disclosure errors in real estate secured loans
consummated after September 30, 1995. The Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork
Reduction Act of 1996 further amended the TILA. The amendments were made to simplify and
improve disclosures related to credit transactions.
The Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (the E-Sign Act), 15 U.S.C.
7001 et seq., was enacted in 2000 and did not require implementing regulations. On November
9, 2007, amendments to Regulation Z and the official commentary were issued to simplify the
regulation and provide guidance on the electronic delivery of disclosures consistent with the
E-Sign Act.
In July 2008, Regulation Z was amended to protect consumers in the mortgage market from
unfair, abusive, or deceptive lending and servicing practices. Specifically, the change applied
protections to a newly defined category of “higher-priced mortgage loans” that includes virtually
all closed-end subprime loans secured by a consumer’s principal dwelling. The revisions also
applied new protections to mortgage loans secured by a dwelling, regardless of loan price, and
required the delivery of early disclosures for more types of transactions. The revisions also
1
These reflect FFIEC-approved procedures.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 1
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
banned several advertising practices deemed deceptive or misleading. The Mortgage Disclosure
Improvement Act of 2008 (MDIA) broadened and added to the requirements of the Board’s July
2008 final rule by requiring early Truth in Lending disclosures for more types of transactions and
by adding a waiting period between the time when disclosures are given and consummation of
the transaction. In 2009, Regulation Z was amended to address those provisions. The MDIA also
requires disclosure of payment examples if the loan’s interest rate or payments can change, as
well as disclosure of a statement that there is no guarantee the consumer will be able to refinance
in the future. In 2010, Regulation Z was amended to address these provisions, which became
effective on January 30, 2011.
In December 2008, the Board adopted two final rules pertaining to open-end (not home-secured)
credit. The first rule involved Regulation Z revisions and made comprehensive changes applicable
to several disclosures required for: applications and solicitations, new accounts, periodic
statements, change in terms notifications, and advertisements. The second was a rule published
under the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) Act and was issued jointly with the Office of Thrift
Supervision and the National Credit Union Administration. It sought to protect consumers from
unfair acts or practices with respect to consumer credit card accounts. Before these rules became
effective, however, the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure Act of 2009
(Credit CARD Act) amended the TILA and established a number of new requirements for open-
end consumer credit plans. Several provisions of the Credit CARD Act are similar to provisions in
the Board’s December 2008 TILA revisions and the joint FTC Act rule, but other portions of the
Credit CARD Act address practices or mandate disclosures that were not addressed in these rules.
In light of the Credit CARD Act, the Board, NCUA, and OTS withdrew the substantive
requirements of the joint FTC Act rule. On July 1, 2010, compliance with the provisions of the
Board’s rule that were not impacted by the Credit CARD Act became effective.
The Credit CARD Act provisions became effective in three stages. The provisions effective first
(August 20, 2009) required creditors to increase the amount of notice consumers receive before the
rate on a credit card account is increased or a significant change is made to the account’s terms.
These amendments also allowed consumers to reject such increases and changes by informing the
creditor before the increase or change goes into effect. The provisions effective next (February 22,
2010) involved rules regarding interest rate increases, over-the-limit transactions, and student
cards. Finally, the provisions effective last (August 22, 2010) addressed the reasonableness and
proportionality of penalty fees and charges and re-evaluation of rate increases.
In 2009, Regulation Z was amended following the passage of the Higher Education Opportunity
Act (HEOA) by adding disclosure and timing requirements that apply to lenders making private
education loans.
In 2009, the Helping Families Save Their Homes Act amended the TILA to establish a new
requirement for notifying consumers of the sale or transfer of their mortgage loans. The
purchaser or assignee that acquires the loan must provide the required disclosures no later than
30 days after the date on which it acquired the loan.
In 2010, the Board further amended Regulation Z to prohibit payment to a loan originator that is
based on the terms or conditions of the loan, other than the amount of credit extended. The
CFPB April 2015 TILA 2
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
amendment applies to mortgage brokers and the companies that employ them, as well as to
mortgage loan officers employed by depository institutions and other lenders. In addition, the
amendment prohibits a loan originator from directing or “steering” a consumer to a loan that is
not in the consumer’s interest to increase the loan originator’s compensation.
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act of 2010 (Dodd-Frank Act)
amended the TILA to include several provisions that protect the integrity of the appraisal process
when a consumer’s home is securing the loan. The rule also requires that appraisers receive
customary and reasonable payments for their services. The appraiser and loan originator
compensation requirements had a mandatory compliance date of April 6, 2011.
The Dodd-Frank Act generally granted rulemaking authority under the TILA to the Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau (CFPB). Title XIV of the Dodd-Frank Act included a number of
amendments to the TILA, and in 2013, the CFPB issued rules to implement them. Prohibitions on
mandatory arbitration and waivers of consumer rights, as well as requirements that lengthen the
time creditors must maintain an escrow account for higher-priced mortgage loans, were generally
effective June 1, 2013. The remaining amendments to Regulation Z were effective in January
2014.2 These amendments include ability-to-repay requirements for mortgage loans, appraisal
requirements for higher-priced mortgage loans, a revised and expanded test for high-cost
mortgages, as well as additional restrictions on those loans, expanded requirements for servicers of
mortgage loans, refined loan originator compensation rules and loan origination qualification
standards, and a prohibition on financing credit insurance for mortgage loans. The amendments
also established new record retention requirements for certain provisions of the TILA. On October
22, 2014, the CFPB issued a final rule providing an alternative small servicer definition for
nonprofit entities and amended ability to repay exemption for nonprofit entities. The final rule also
provided a cure mechanism for the points and fees limit that applies to qualified mortgages. The
final rule was effective on November 3, 2014, except for one provision that will be effective on
August 1, 2015.
In 2013, the CFPB also revised several open-end credit provisions in Regulation Z. The CFPB
revised the general limitation on the total amount of account fees that a credit card issuer may
require a consumer to pay. Effective March 28, 2013, the limit is 25 percent of the credit limit in
effect when the account is opened and applies only during the first year after account opening. The
CFPB also amended Regulation Z to remove the requirement that card issuers consider the
consumer’s independent ability to pay for applicants who are 21 or older and to permit issuers to
consider income and assets to which such consumers have a reasonable expectation of access. This
change was effective May 3, 2013, with a mandatory compliance date of November 4, 2013.
In 2013, the CFPB further amended Regulation Z as well as Regulation X, the regulation
implementing the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act (RESPA), to fulfill the mandate in the
2
The amendment to 12 CFR 1026.35(e) was effective July 24, 2013; the amendments to section 12 CFR 1026.35(b)(2)(iii),
1026.36(a), (b), and (j), and commentary to section 1026.25(c)(2), 1026.35, and 1026.36(a), (b), (d), and (f) in Supp. I to Part
1026, were effective January 1, 2014. These FFIEC examination procedures cover amendments to Regulation Z that were issued by
the CFPB in final form as of January 20, 2015.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 3
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Dodd-Frank Act to integrate the mortgage disclosures under TILA and RESPA sections 4 and 5.
Regulation Z now contains two new forms required for most closed-end consumer mortgage
loans. The Loan Estimate is provided within three business days from application, and the
Closing Disclosure is provided to consumers three business days before loan consummation.
These disclosures must be used for mortgage loans for which the creditor or mortgage broker
receives an application on or after August 1, 2015.3
Format of Regulation Z
The rules creditors must follow differ depending on whether the creditor is offering open-end
credit, such as credit cards or home-equity lines, or closed-end credit, such as car loans or
mortgages.
Subpart A (sections 1026.1 through 1026.4) of the regulation provides general information that
applies to open-end and closed-end credit transactions. It sets forth definitions (§1026.2) and
stipulates which transactions are covered and which are exempt from the regulation (§1026.3). It
also contains the rules for determining which fees are finance charges (§1026.4).
Subpart B (sections 1026.5 through 1026.16) relates to open-end credit. It contains rules on
account-opening disclosures (§1026.6) and periodic statements (§§1026.7-8). It also describes
special rules that apply to credit card transactions, treatment of payments (§1026.10).and credit
balances (§1026.11), procedures for resolving credit billing errors (§1026.13), annual percentage
rate calculations (§1026.14), rescission rights (§1026.15), and advertising (§1026.16).
Subpart C (sections 1026.17 through 1026.24) relates to closed-end credit. It contains rules on
disclosures (§§1026.17 - 20), treatment of credit balances (§1026.21), annual percentage rate
calculations (§1026.22), rescission right (§1026.23), and advertising (§1026.24).
Subpart D (sections 1026.25 through 1026.30) contain rules on oral disclosures (§1026.26),
disclosures in languages other than English (§1026.27), record retention (§1026.25), effect on
state laws (§1026.28), state exemptions (§1026.29), and rate limitations (§1026.30).
Subpart E (sections 1026.31 through 1026.45) Subpart E contains special rules for mortgage
transactions. The rules require certain disclosures and provide limitations for closed-end credit
transactions and open-end credit plans that have rates or fees above specified amounts or certain
prepayment penalties (§1026.32). Special disclosures are also required, including the total annual
loan cost rate, for reverse mortgage transactions (§1026.33). The rules also prohibit specific acts
and practices in connection with high-cost mortgages, as defined in 12 CFR 1026.32(a),
(§1026.34); in connection with closed-end higher-priced mortgage loans, as defined in 12 CFR
3
There are additional regulations that take effect on August 1, 2015, regardless of whether an application has been received on
that date. Specifically, the rule restricts the imposition of fees on a consumer before the consumer has received the Loan Estimate
and indicated an intent to proceed, providing a consumer with a written estimate of terms or costs (prior to providing the Loan
Estimate) without also providing a written statement informing the consumer that the terms or costs may change. The rule also
restricts a creditor from requiring the submission of documents verifying information related to the consumer’s application before
providing the Loan Estimate.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 4
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
1026.35(a), (§1026.35); and in connection with an extension of credit secured by a dwelling
(§1026.36). Disclosure requirements, effective August 1, 2015, for most closed-end transactions
secured by real property, as required by 12 CFR 1026.19(e) and (f) are also provided
(§§1026.37-38).
Subpart F (sections 1026.46 through 1026.48) relates to private education loans. It contains
rules on disclosures (§1026.46), limitations on changes in terms after approval (§1026.48), the
right to cancel the loan (§1026.47), and limitations on co-branding in the marketing of private
education loans (§1026.48).
Subpart G (sections 1026.51 through 1026.60) relates to credit card accounts under an open-end
(not home-secured) consumer credit plan (except for §1026.57(c), which applies to all open-end
credit plans). This subpart contains rules regarding credit and charge card application and
solicitation disclosures (§1026.60). It also contains rules on evaluation of a consumer’s ability to
make the required payments under the terms of an account (§1026.51), limits the fees that a
consumer can be required to pay (§1026.52), and contains rules on allocation of payments in
excess of the minimum payment (§1026.53). It also sets forth certain limitations on the imposition
of finance charges as the result of a loss of a grace period (§1026.54), and on increases in annual
percentage rates, fees, and charges for credit card accounts (§1026.55), including the reevaluation
of rate increases (§1026.59). This subpart prohibits the assessment of fees or charges for over-the-
limit transactions unless the consumer affirmatively consents to the creditor’s payment of over-the-
limit transactions (§1026.56). This subpart also sets forth rules for reporting and marketing of
college student open-end credit (§1026.57). Finally, it sets forth requirements for the Internet
posting of credit card accounts under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan
(§1026.58).
Several appendices contain information such as the procedures for determinations about state
laws, state exemptions and issuance of official interpretations, special rules for certain kinds of
credit plans, model disclosure forms, standards for determining ability to pay, and the rules for
computing annual percentage rates in closed-end credit transactions and total-annual-loan-cost
rates for reverse mortgage transactions.
Official interpretations of the regulation are published in a commentary. Good faith compliance
with the commentary protects creditors from civil liability under the TILA. In addition, the
commentary includes more detailed information on disclosures or other actions required of
creditors. It is virtually impossible to comply with Regulation Z without reference to and reliance
on the commentary.
NOTE: The following narrative does not discuss all the sections of Regulation Z, but rather
highlights only certain sections of the regulation and the TILA.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 5
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Subpart A – General
This subpart contains general information regarding both open-end and closed-end credit
transactions. It sets forth definitions (§1026.2) and sets out which transactions are covered and
which are exempt from the regulation (§1026.3). It also contains the rules for determining which
fees are finance charges (§1026.4).
Purpose of the TILA and Regulation Z
The TILA is intended to ensure that credit terms are disclosed in a meaningful way so consumers
can compare credit terms more readily and knowledgeably. Before its enactment, consumers
were faced with a bewildering array of credit terms and rates. It was difficult to compare loans
because they were seldom presented in the same format. Now, all creditors must use the same
credit terminology and expressions of rates. In addition to providing a uniform system for
disclosures, the act:
• Protects consumers against inaccurate and unfair credit billing and credit card practices;
• Provides consumers with rescission rights;
• Provides for rate caps on certain dwelling-secured loans;
• Imposes limitations on home equity lines of credit and certain closed-end home mortgages;
• Provides minimum standards for most dwelling-secured loans; and
• Delineates and prohibits unfair or deceptive mortgage lending practices.
The TILA and Regulation Z do not, however, tell financial institutions how much interest they
may charge or whether they must grant a consumer a loan.
Summary of Coverage Considerations
– Sections 1026.1 and 1026.2
Lenders must carefully consider several factors when deciding whether a loan requires Truth in
Lending disclosures or is subject to other Regulation Z requirements. The coverage
considerations under Regulation Z are addressed in more detail in the commentary to Regulation
Z. For example, broad coverage considerations are included under section 1026.1(c) of the
regulation and relevant definitions appear in section 1026.2.
Exempt Transactions – Section 1026.3
The following transactions are exempt from Regulation Z:
• Credit extended primarily for a business, commercial, or agricultural purpose;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 6
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Credit extended to other than a natural person (including credit to government agencies or
instrumentalities);
• Credit in excess of an annually adjusted threshold not secured by real property or by personal
property used or expected to be used as the principal dwelling of the consumer;4
• Public utility credit;
• Credit extended by a broker-dealer registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) or the Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), involving securities or
commodities accounts;
• Home fuel budget plans not subject to a finance charge; and
• Certain student loan programs.
However, when a credit card is involved, generally exempt credit (e.g., business purpose credit)
is subject to the requirements that govern the issuance of credit cards and liability for their
unauthorized use. Credit cards must not be issued on an unsolicited basis and, if a credit card is
lost or stolen, the cardholder must not be held liable for more than $50 for the unauthorized use
of the card. (Comment 3-1)
When determining whether credit is for consumer purposes, the creditor must evaluate all of the
following:
• Any statement obtained from the consumer describing the purpose of the proceeds.
For example, a statement that the proceeds will be used for a vacation trip would indicate
o
a consumer purpose.
If the loan has a mixed-purpose (e.g., proceeds will be used to buy a car that will be used
o
for personal and business purposes), the lender must look to the primary purpose of the
loan to decide whether disclosures are necessary. A statement of purpose from the
consumer will help the lender make that decision.
A checked box indicating that the loan is for a business purpose, absent any
o
documentation showing the intended use of the proceeds could be insufficient evidence
that the loan did not have a consumer purpose.
• The consumer’s primary occupation and how it relates to the use of the proceeds. The higher
the correlation between the consumer’s occupation and the property purchased from the loan
proceeds, the greater the likelihood that the loan has a business purpose. For example,
proceeds used to purchase dental supplies for a dentist would indicate a business purpose.
4
The Dodd-Frank Act requires that this threshold be adjusted annually by any annual percentage increase in the Consumer Price
Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers (CPI-W). Accordingly, based on the annual percentage increase in the CPI-
W as of June 1, 2012, the exemption threshold increased from $51,800 to $53,000, effective January 1, 2013.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 7
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Personal management of the assets purchased from proceeds. The lower the degree of the
borrower’s personal involvement in the management of the investment or enterprise
purchased by the loan proceeds, the less likely the loan will have a business purpose. For
example, money borrowed to purchase stock in an automobile company by an individual who
does not work for that company would indicate a personal investment and a consumer
purpose.
• The size of the transaction. The larger the size of the transaction, the more likely the loan will
have a business purpose. For example, if the loan is for a $5,000,000 real estate transaction,
that might indicate a business purpose.
• The amount of income derived from the property acquired by the loan proceeds relative to
the borrower’s total income. The lesser the income derived from the acquired property, the
more likely the loan will have a consumer purpose. For example, if the borrower has an
annual salary of $100,000 and receives about $500 in annual dividends from the acquired
property, that would indicate a consumer purpose.
All five factors must be evaluated before the lender can conclude that disclosures are not
necessary. Normally, no one factor, by itself, is sufficient reason to determine the applicability of
Regulation Z. In any event, the financial institution may routinely furnish disclosures to the
consumer. Disclosure under such circumstances does not control whether the transaction is
covered, but can assure protection to the financial institution and compliance with the law.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 8
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Coverage Considerations under Regulation Z
Is the
purpose of
Regulation Z does not apply, except for the rules of issuance of and
the credit No
unauthorized use liability for credit cards. (Exempt credit includes loans
for
with a business or agricultural purpose, and certain student loans. Credit
personal,
extended to acquire or improve rental property that is not owner-occupied
family or
is considered business purpose credit.)
household
use?
Yes
Is the
consumer No
Regulation Z does not apply. (Credit that is extended to a land trust is deemed
credit
to be credit extended to a consumer.)
extended to a
consumer?
Yes The institution is not a “creditor” and Regulation Z does not apply unless at
least one of the following tests is met:
1) The institution extends consumer credit regularly and
a) The obligation is initially payable to the institution and
Is the
consumer No b) The obligation is either payable by written agreement in more than four
credit installments or is subject to a finance charge
extended
by a 2) The institution is a card issuer that extends closed-end credit that is subject to
creditor? a finance charge or is payable by written agreement in more than four
installments.
3) The institution is not the card issuer, but it imposes a finance charge at the
time of honoring a credit card.
Yes
Is the loan or
credit plan Is the
secured by No amount No Regulation Z does not apply, but may apply later if the loan
real property financed or is refinanced for $53,000 or less. If the principal dwelling is
or by a credit limit taken as collateral after consummation, rescission rights will
dwelling? $50,000 or apply and, in the case of open-end credit, billing disclosures
less?
and other provisions of Regulation Z will apply.
Yes Yes
Regulation Z applies
CFPB April 2015 TILA 9
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Determination of Finance Charge and Annual
Percentage Rate (“APR”)
Finance Charge (Open-End and Closed-End Credit)
– Section 1026.4
The finance charge is a measure of the cost of consumer credit represented in dollars and cents.
Along with APR disclosures, the disclosure of the finance charge is central to the uniform credit
cost disclosure envisioned by the TILA.
The finance charge does not include any charge of a type payable in a comparable cash
transaction. Examples of charges payable in a comparable cash transaction may include taxes,
title, license fees, or registration fees paid in connection with an automobile purchase.
Finance charges include any charges or fees payable directly or indirectly by the consumer and
imposed directly or indirectly by the financial institution either as an incident to or as a condition
of an extension of consumer credit. The finance charge on a loan always includes any interest
charges and often, other charges. Regulation Z includes examples, applicable both to open-end
and closed-end credit transactions, of what must, must not, or need not be included in the
disclosed finance charge (§1026.4(b)).
Accuracy Tolerances (Closed-End Credit)
– Sections 1026.18(d) and 1026.23(g)
Regulation Z provides finance charge tolerances for legal accuracy that should not be confused
with those provided in the TILA for reimbursement under regulatory agency orders. As with
disclosed APRs, if a disclosed finance charge were legally accurate, it would not be subject to
reimbursement.
Under the TILA and Regulation Z, finance charge disclosures for open-end credit must be
accurate since there is no tolerance for finance charge errors. However, both the TILA and
Regulation Z permit various finance charge accuracy tolerances for closed-end credit.
Tolerances for the finance charge in a closed-end transaction, other than a mortgage loan, are
generally $5 if the amount financed is less than or equal to $1,000 and $10 if the amount
financed exceeds $1,000. Tolera nces for certain transactions consummated on or after September
30, 1995, are noted below.
• Credit secured by real property or a dwelling (closed-end credit only):
The disclosed finance charge is considered accurate if it is not understated by more than
o
$100.
Overstatements are not violations.
o
• Rescission rights after the three-business-day rescission period (closed-end credit only):
CFPB April 2015 TILA 10
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
The disclosed finance charge is considered accurate if it does not vary from the actual
o
finance charge by more than one-half of 1 percent of the credit extended or $100,
whichever is greater.
The disclosed finance charge is considered accurate if it does not vary from the actual
o
finance charge by more than 1 percent of the credit extended for the initial and
subsequent refinancings of residential mortgage transactions when the new loan is made
at a different financial institution. (This excludes high-cost mortgage loans subject to
section 1026.32, transactions in which there are new advances, and new consolidations.)
• Rescission rights in foreclosure:
The disclosed finance charge is considered accurate if it does not vary from the actual
o
finance charge by more than $35.
Overstatements are not considered violations.
o
The consumer can rescind if a mortgage broker fee that should have been included in the
o
finance charge was not included.
NOTE: Normally, the finance charge tolerance for a rescindable transaction is either 0.5
percent of the credit transaction or, for certain refinancings, 1 percent of the credit
transaction. However, in the event of a foreclosure, the consumer may exercise the right of
rescission if the disclosed finance charge is understated by more than $35.
See the “Finance Charge Tolerances” charts within these examination procedures for help in
determining appropriate finance charge tolerances.
Calculating the Finance Charge (Closed-End Credit)
One of the more complex tasks under Regulation Z is determining whether a charge associated
with an extension of credit must be included in, or excluded from, the disclosed finance charge.
The finance charge initially includes any charge that is, or will be, connected with a specific
loan. Charges imposed by third parties are finance charges if the financial institution requires use
of the third party. Charges imposed by settlement or closing agents are finance charges if the
bank requires the specific service that gave rise to the charge and the charge is not otherwise
excluded. The “Finance Charge Tolerances” charts within this document briefly summarize the
rules that must be considered.
Prepaid Finance Charges – Section 1026.18(b)(3)
A prepaid finance charge is any finance charge paid separately to the financial institution or to a
third party, in cash or by check before or at closing, settlement, or consummation of a
transaction, or withheld from the proceeds of the credit at any time.
Prepaid finance charges effectively reduce the amount of funds available for the consumer’s use;
usually before or at the time the transaction is consummated.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 11
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Examples of finance charges frequently prepaid by consumers are borrower’s points, loan
origination fees, real estate construction inspection fees, odd days’ interest (interest attributable
to part of the first payment period when that period is longer than a regular payment period),
mortgage guarantee insurance fees paid to the Federal Housing Administration, private mortgage
insurance (PMI) paid to such companies as the Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Company (MGIC),
and, in non-real-estate transactions, credit report fees.
Precomputed Finance Charges
A precomputed finance charge includes, for example, interest added to the note amount that is
computed by the add-on, discount, or simple interest methods. If reflected in the face amount of
the debt instrument as part of the consumer’s obligation, finance charges that are not viewed as
prepaid finance charges are treated as precomputed finance charges that are earned over the life
of the loan.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 12
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Finance Charge Chart
FINANCE CHARGE = DOLLAR COST OF CONSUMER CREDIT: It includes any charge payable directly or indirectly by
the consumer and imposed directly or indirectly by the creditor as a condition of or incident to the extension of credit.
CHARGES INCLUDED CONDITIONS CHARGES NEVER
CHARGES ALWAYS UNLESS CONDITIONS (Any loan) CHARGES NOT INCLUDED IF BONA INCLUDED
INCLUDED ARE MET FIDE AND REASONABLE IN AMOUNT
(Residential mortgage transactions and
loans secured by real estate)
Charges payable in a comparable
cash transaction.
Interest Premiums for credit life, A&H, or Insurance not required, disclosures
loss of income insurance are made, and consumer authorizes
Fees for title insurance, title examination,
property survey, etc.
Fees for unanticipated late
payments
Transaction fees
Debt cancellation fees Coverage not required, disclosures
are made, and consumer authorizes Fees for preparing loan documents,
mortgages, and other settlement documents Overdraft fees not agreed to in
writing
Loan origination fees Consumer
points
Premiums for property or liability Consumer selects insurance
insurance company and disclosures are made Amounts required to be paid into escrow, if
not otherwise included in the finance Seller’s points
charge
Credit guarantee insurance
premiums
Insurer waives right of subrogation,
Premiums for vendor’s single consumer selects insurance
interest (VSI) insurance company, and disclosures are made Participation or membership fees
Notary fees
Charges imposed on the creditor for
purchasing the loan, which are
passed on to the consumer
Security interest charges (filing The fee is for lien purposes, Discount offered by the seller to
fees), insurance in lieu of filing fees prescribed by law, payable to a third Pre-consummation flood and pest induce payment by cash or other
and certain notary fees public official and is itemized and inspection fees means not involving the use of a
disclosed credit card
Discounts for inducing payment by
means other than credit
Use of the third party is not required Appraisal and credit report fees
Charges imposed by third parties to obtain loan and creditor does not Interest forfeited as a result of
retain the charge interest reduction required by law
Mortgage broker fees
Creditor does not require and does Charges absorbed by the creditor as
Charges imposed by third-party not retain the fee for the particular a cost of doing business
closing agents service
Other examples: Fee for preparing
TILA disclosures; real estate
construction loan inspection fees;
fees for post-consummation tax or Application fees, if charged to all
flood service policy; required credit Appraisal and credit report fees applicants, are not finance charges.
life insurance charges Application fees may include
appraisal or credit report fees.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 13
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Instructions for the Finance Charge Chart
The finance charge initially includes any charge that is, or will be, connected with a specific
loan. Charges imposed by third parties are finance charges if the creditor requires use of the third
party. Charges imposed on the consumer by a settlement agent are finance charges only if the
creditor requires the particular services for which the settlement agent is charging the borrower
and the charge is not otherwise excluded from the finance charge.
Immediately below the finance charge definition, the chart presents five captions applicable to
determining whether a loan related charge is a finance charge.
The first caption is charges always included. This category focuses on specific charges given in
the regulation or commentary as examples of finance charges.
The second caption, charges included unless conditions are met, focuses on charges that must be
included in the finance charge unless the creditor meets specific disclosure or other conditions to
exclude the charges from the finance charge.
The third caption, conditions, focuses on the conditions that need to be met if the charges
identified to the left of the conditions are permitted to be excluded from the finance charge.
Although most charges under the second caption may be included in the finance charge at the
creditor’s option, third-party charges and application fees (listed last under the third caption)
must be excluded from the finance charge if the relevant conditions are met. However, inclusion
of appraisal and credit report charges as part of the application fee is optional.
The fourth caption, charges not included, identifies fees or charges that are not included in the
finance charge under conditions identified by the caption. If the credit transaction is secured by real
property or the loan is a residential mortgage transaction, the charges identified in the column, if
they are bona fide and reasonable in amount, must be excluded from the finance charge. For
example, if a consumer loan is secured by a vacant lot or commercial real estate, any appraisal fees
connected with the loan must not be included in the finance charge.
The fifth caption, charges never included, lists specific charges provided by the regulation as
examples of those that automatically are not finance charges (e.g., fees for unanticipated late
payments).
Annual Percentage Rate Definition – Section 1026.22
(Closed-End Credit)
Credit costs may vary depending on the interest rate, the amount of the loan and other charges,
the timing and amounts of advances, and the repayment schedule. The APR, which must be
disclosed in nearly all consumer credit transactions, is designed to take into account all relevant
factors and to provide a uniform measure for comparing the cost of various credit transactions.
The APR is a measure of the cost of credit, expressed as a nominal yearly rate. It relates the
amount and timing of value received by the consumer to the amount and timing of payments made.
The disclosure of the APR is central to the uniform credit cost disclosure envisioned by the TILA.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 14
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
The value of a closed-end credit APR must be disclosed as a single rate only, whether the loan
has a single interest rate, a variable interest rate, a discounted variable interest rate, or graduated
payments based on separate interest rates (step rates), and it must appear with the segregated
disclosures. Segregated disclosures are grouped together and do not contain any information not
directly related to the disclosures required under section 1026.18.
Since an APR measures the total cost of credit, including costs such as transaction charges or
premiums for credit guarantee insurance, it is not an “interest” rate, as that term is generally
used. APR calculations do not rely on definitions of interest in state law and often include
charges, such as a commitment fee paid by the consumer, that are not viewed by some state
usury statutes as interest. Conversely, an APR might not include a charge, such as a credit report
fee in a real property transaction, which some state laws might view as interest for usury
purposes. Furthermore, measuring the timing of value received and of payments made, which is
essential if APR calculations are to be accurate, must be consistent with parameters under
Regulation Z.
The APR is often considered to be the finance charge expressed as a percentage. However, two
loans could require the same finance charge and still have different APRs because of differing
values of the amount financed or of payment schedules. For example, the APR is 12 percent on a
loan with an amount financed of $5,000 and 36 equal monthly payments of $166.07 each. It is
13.26 percent on a loan with an amount financed of $4,500 and 35 equal monthly payments of
$152.18 each and final payment of $152.22. In both cases the finance charge is $978.52. The
APRs on these example loans are not the same because an APR does not only reflect the finance
charge. It relates the amount and timing of value received by the consumer to the amount and
timing of payments made.
The APR is a function of:
• The amount financed, which is not necessarily equivalent to the loan amount. For example, if
the consumer must pay at closing a separate 1 percent loan origination fee (prepaid finance
charge) on a $100,000 residential mortgage loan, the loan amount is $100,000, but the
amount financed would be $100,000 less the $1,000 loan fee, or $99,000.
• The finance charge, which is not necessarily equivalent to the total interest amount (interest
is not defined by Regulation Z, but rather is defined by state or other federal law). For
example:
If the consumer must pay a $25 credit report fee for an auto loan, the fee must be
o
included in the finance charge. The finance charge in that case is the sum of the interest
on the loan (i.e., interest generated by the application of a percentage rate against the loan
amount) plus the $25 credit report fee.
If the consumer must pay a $25 credit report fee for a home improvement loan secured by
o
real property, the credit report fee must be excluded from the finance charge. The finance
charge in that case would be only the interest on the loan.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 15
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• The payment schedule, which does not necessarily include only principal and interest (P + I)
payments. For example:
If the consumer borrows $2,500 for a vacation trip at 14 percent simple interest per
o
annum and repays that amount with 25 equal monthly payments beginning one month
from consummation of the transaction, the monthly P + I payment will be $115.87, if all
months are considered equal, and the amount financed would be $2,500. If the
consumer’s payments are increased by $2.00 a month to pay a non-financed $50 loan fee
during the life of the loan, the amount financed would remain at $2,500 but the payment
schedule would be increased to $117.87 a month, the finance charge would increase by
$50, and there would be a corresponding increase in the APR. This would be the case
whether or not state law defines the $50 loan fee as interest.
If the loan above has 55 days to the first payment and the consumer prepays interest at
o
consummation ($24.31 to cover the first 25 days), the amount financed would be $2,500 -
$24.31, or $2,475.69. Although the amount financed has been reduced to reflect the
consumer’s reduced use of available funds at consummation, the time interval during
which the consumer has use of the $2,475.69, 55 days to the first payment, has not
changed. Since the first payment period exceeds the limitations of the regulation’s minor
irregularities provisions (see §1026.17(c)(4)), it may not be treated as regular. In
calculating the APR, the first payment period must not be reduced by 25 days (i.e., the
first payment period may not be treated as one month).
Financial institutions may, if permitted by state or other law, precompute interest by applying a
rate against a loan balance using a simple interest, add-on, discount or some other method, and
may earn interest using a simple interest accrual system, the Rule of 78’s (if permitted by law) or
some other method. Unless the financial institution’s internal interest earnings and accrual
methods involve a simple interest rate based on a 360-day year that is applied over actual days
(even that is important only for determining the accuracy of the payment schedule), it is not
relevant in calculating an APR, since an APR is not an interest rate (as that term is commonly
used under state or other law). Since the APR normally need not rely on the internal accrual
systems of a bank, it always may be computed after the loan terms have been agreed upon (as
long as it is disclosed before actual consummation of the transaction).
Special Requirements for Calculating the Finance Charge and APR
Proper calculation of the finance charge and APR are of primary importance. The regulation
requires that the terms “finance charge” and “annual percentage rate” be disclosed more
conspicuously than any other required disclosure, subject to limited exceptions. The finance
charge and APR, more than any other disclosures, enable consumers to understand the cost of the
credit and to comparison shop for credit. A creditor’s failure to disclose those values accurately
can result in significant monetary damages to the creditor, either from a class action lawsuit or
from a regulatory agency’s order to reimburse consumers for violations of law.
If an APR or finance charge is disclosed incorrectly, the error is not, in itself, a violation of the
regulation if:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 16
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• The error resulted from a corresponding error in a calculation tool used in good faith by the
financial institution.
• Upon discovery of the error, the financial institution promptly discontinues use of that
calculation tool for disclosure purposes.
• The financial institution notifies the CFPB in writing of the error in the calculation tool.
When a financial institution claims a calculation tool was used in good faith, the financial
institution assumes a reasonable degree of responsibility for ensuring that the tool in question
provides the accuracy required by the regulation. For example, the financial institution might
verify the results obtained using the tool by comparing those results to the figures obtained by
using another calculation tool. The financial institution might also verify that the tool, if it is
designed to operate under the actuarial method, produces figures similar to those provided by the
examples in appendix J to the regulation. The calculation tool should be checked for accuracy
before it is first used and periodically thereafter.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 17
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Subpart B – Open-End Credit
Subpart B relates to open-end credit. It contains rules on account-opening disclosures (§1026.6)
and periodic statements (§§1026.7-.8). It also describes special rules that apply to credit card
transactions, treatment of payments (§1026.10) and credit balances (§1026.11), procedures for
resolving credit billing errors (§1026.13), annual percentage rate calculations (§1026.14),
rescission requirements (§1026.15) and advertising (§1026.16).
Time of Disclosures (Periodic Statements)
– Section 1026.5(b)
For credit card accounts under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan, creditors
must adopt reasonable procedures designed to ensure that periodic statements are mailed or
delivered at least 21 days prior to the payment due date disclosed on the periodic statement and
that payments are not treated as late for any purpose if they are received within 21 days after
mailing or delivery of the statement. In addition, for all open-end consumer credit accounts with
grace periods, creditors must adopt reasonable procedures designed to ensure that periodic
statements are mailed or delivered at least 21 days prior to the date on which a grace period (if
any) expires and that finance charges are not imposed as a result of the loss of a grace period if a
payment is received within 21 days after mailing or delivery of a statement. For purposes of this
requirement, a “grace period” is defined as a period within which any credit extended may be
repaid without incurring a finance charge due to a periodic interest rate. For non-credit card
open-end consumer plans without a grace period, creditors must adopt reasonable policies and
procedures designed to ensure that periodic statements are mailed or delivered at least 14 days
prior to the date on which the required minimum periodic payment is due. Moreover, the creditor
must adopt reasonable policies and procedures to ensure that it does not treat as late a required
minimum periodic payment received by the creditor within 14 days after it has mailed or
delivered the periodic statement.
Subsequent Disclosures (Open-End Credit)
– Section 1026.9
For open-end, not home-secured credit, the following applies:
Creditors are required to provide consumers with 45 days’ advance written notice of rate
increases and other significant changes to the terms of their credit card account agreements. The
list of “significant changes” includes most fees and other terms that a consumer should be aware
of before use of the account. Examples of such fees and terms include:
• Penalty fees;
• Transaction fees;
• Fees imposed for the issuance or availability of the open-end plan;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 18
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Grace period; and
• Balance computation method.
Changes that do not require advance notice include:
• Reductions of finance charges;
• Termination of account privileges resulting from an agreement involving a court proceeding;
• The change is an increase in an APR upon expiration of a specified period of time previously
disclosed in writing;
• The change applies to increases in variable APRs that change according to an index not
under the card issuer’s control; and
• Rate increases due to the completion of, or failure of a consumer to comply with, the terms of
a workout or temporary hardship arrangement, if those terms are disclosed prior to
commencement of the arrangement.
A creditor may suspend account privileges, terminate an account, or lower the credit limit
without notice. However, a creditor that lowers the credit limit may not impose an over limit fee
or penalty rate as a result of exceeding the new credit limit without a 45-day advance notice that
the credit limit has been reduced.
For significant changes in terms (with the exception of rate changes, increases in the minimum
payment, certain changes in the balance computation method, and when the change results from
the consumer’s failure to make a required minimum periodic payment within 60 days after the
due date), a creditor must also provide consumers the right to reject the change. If the consumer
does reject the change prior to the effective date, the creditor may not apply the change to the
account (§1026.9(h)(2)(i)).
In addition, when a consumer rejects a change or increase, the creditor must not:
• Impose a fee or charge or treat the account as in default solely as a result of the rejection; or
• Require repayment of the balance on the account using a method that is less beneficial to the
consumer than one of the following methods: (1) the method of repayment prior to the
rejection; (2) an amortization period of not less than five years from the date of rejection; or
(3) a minimum periodic payment that includes a percentage of the balance that is not more
than twice the percentage included prior to the date of rejection.
Finance Charge (Open-End Credit)
– Sections 1026.6(a)(1) & 1026.6(b)(3)
Each finance charge imposed must be individually itemized. The aggregate total amount of the
finance charge need not be disclosed.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 19
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Determining the Balance and Computing the Finance Charge
The examiner must know how to compute the balance to which the periodic rate is applied.
Common methods used are the previous balance method, the daily balance method, and the
average daily balance method, which are described as follows:
• Previous balance method. The balance on which the periodic finance charge is computed is
based on the balance outstanding at the start of the billing cycle. The periodic rate is
multiplied by this balance to compute the finance charge.
• Daily balance method. A daily periodic rate is applied to either the balance on each day in
the cycle or the sum of the balances on each of the days in the cycle. If a daily periodic rate is
multiplied by the balance on each day in the billing cycle, the finance charge is the sum of
the products. If the daily periodic rate is multiplied by the sum of all the daily balances, the
result is the finance charge.
• Average daily balance method. The average daily balance is the sum of the daily balances
(either including or excluding current transactions) divided by the number of days in the
billing cycle. A periodic rate is then multiplied by the average daily balance to determine the
finance charge. If the periodic rate is a daily one, the product of the rate multiplied by the
average balance is multiplied by the number of days in the cycle.
In addition to those common methods, financial institutions have other ways of calculating the
balance to which the periodic rate is applied. By reading the financial institution’s explanation,
the examiner should be able to calculate the balance to which the periodic rate was applied. In
some cases, the examiner may need to obtain additional information from the financial institution
to verify the explanation disclosed. Any inability to understand the disclosed explanation should
be discussed with management, who should be reminded of Regulation Z’s requirement that
disclosures be clear and conspicuous.
When a balance is determined without first deducting all credits and payments made during the
billing cycle, that fact and the amount of the credits and payments must be disclosed.
If the financial institution uses the daily balance method and applies a single daily periodic rate,
disclosure of the balance to which the rate was applied may be stated as any of the following:
• A balance for each day in the billing cycle. The daily periodic rate is multiplied by the
balance on each day and the sum of the products is the finance charge.
• A balance for each day in the billing cycle on which the balance in the account changes. The
finance charge is figured by the same method as discussed previously, but the statement
shows the balance only for those days on which the balance changed.
• The sum of the daily balances during the billing cycle. The balance on which the finance
charge is computed is the sum of all the daily balances in the billing cycle. The daily periodic
rate is multiplied by that balance to determine the finance charge.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 20
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• The average daily balance during the billing cycle. If this is stated, the financial institution
may, at its option, explain that the average daily balance is or can be multiplied by the
number of days in the billing cycle and the periodic rate applied to the product to determine
the amount of interest.
If the financial institution uses the daily balance method, but applies two or more daily
periodic rates, the sum of the daily balances may not be used. Acceptable ways of disclosing
the balances include:
• A balance for each day in the billing cycle;
• A balance for each day in the billing cycle on which the balance in the account changes; or
• Two or more average daily balances. If the average daily balances are stated, the financial
institution may, at its option, explain that interest is or may be determined by 1) multiplying
each of the average daily balances by the number of days in the billing cycle (or if the daily
rate varied during the cycle), 2) by multiplying each of the results by the applicable daily
periodic rate, and 3) adding these products together.
In explaining the method used to find the balance on which the finance charge is computed, the
financial institution need not reveal how it allocates payments or credits. That information may be
disclosed as additional information, but all required information must be clear and conspicuous.
NOTE: Section 1026.54 prohibits a credit card issuer from calculating finance charges based on
balances for days in previous billing cycles as a result of the loss of a grace period (a practice
sometimes referred to as “double-cycle billing”).
Finance Charge Resulting from Two or More Periodic Rates
Some financial institutions use more than one periodic rate in computing the finance charge. For
example, one rate may apply to balances up to a certain amount and another rate to balances
more than that amount. If two or more periodic rates apply, the financial institution must disclose
all rates and conditions. The range of balances to which each rate applies also must be disclosed.
It is not necessary, however, to break the finance charge into separate components based on the
different rates.
Annual Percentage Rate (Open-End Credit)
The disclosed APR on an open-end credit account is accurate if it is within one-eighth of one
percentage point of the APR calculated under Regulation Z.
Determination of APR – Section 1026.14
The basic method for determining the APR in open-end credit transactions involves multiplying
each periodic rate by the number of periods in a year. This method is used in all types of open-
end disclosures, including:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 21
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• The corresponding APR in the initial disclosures;
• The corresponding APR on periodic statements;
• The APR in early disclosures for credit card accounts;
• The APR in early disclosures for home-equity plans;
• The APR in advertising; and
• The APR in oral disclosures.
The corresponding APR is prospective and it does not involve any particular finance charge or
periodic balance.
A second method of calculating the APR is the quotient method. At a creditor’s option, the
quotient method may be disclosed on periodic statements for home-equity plans subject to
section 1026.40 (“HELOCs”).5 The quotient method reflects the annualized equivalent of the
rate that was actually applied during a cycle. This rate, also known as the effective APR, will
differ from the corresponding APR if the creditor applies minimum, fixed, or transaction charges
to the account during the cycle. (§1026.14(c))
Brief Outline for Open-End Credit APR Calculations on Periodic Statements
NOTE: Assume monthly billing cycles for each of the calculations below.
I. Basic method for determining the APR in an open-end credit transaction. This is the
corresponding APR. (§1026.14(b))
A. Monthly rate x 12 = APR
II. Optional effective APR that may be disclosed on home-equity line of credit (HELOC)
periodic statements
A. APR when only periodic rates are imposed (§1026.14(c)(1))
1. Monthly rate x 12 = APR
Or
2. (Total finance charge / sum of the balances) x 12 = APR
B. APR when minimum or fixed charge, but not transaction charge imposed.
(§1026.14(c)(2))
5
If a creditor does not disclose the effective (or quotient method) APR on a HELOC periodic statement, it must instead disclose
the charges (fees and interest) imposed as provided in section 1026.7(a).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 22
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
1. (Total finance charge / amount of applicable balance6) x 12 = APR7
C. APR when the finance charge includes a charge related to a specific transaction (such as
a cash advance fee), even if the total finance charge also includes any other minimum,
fixed, or other charge not calculated using a periodic rate. (§1026.14(c)(3))
1. (Total finance charge / (all balances + other amounts on which a finance charge was
imposed during the billing cycle without duplication8) x 12 = APR9
D. APR when the finance charge imposed during the billing cycle includes a minimum or
fixed charge that does not exceed $.50 for a monthly or longer billing cycles (or pro rata
part of $.50 for a billing cycle shorter than monthly). (§1026.14(c)(4))
1. Monthly rate x 12 = APR
E. APR calculation when daily periodic rates are applicable if only the periodic rate is
imposed or when a minimum or fixed charge (but not a transactional charge is imposed.
(§1026.14(d))
1. (Total finance charge / average daily balance) x 12 = APR
Or
2. (Total finance charge / sum of daily balances) x 365 = APR
Change in Terms Notices for Home Equity Plans Subject to
Section 1026.40 – Section 1026.9(c)
Servicers are required to provide consumers with 15 days’ advance written notice of a change to
any term required to be disclosed under section 1026.6(a) or where the required minimum
periodic payment is increased. Notice is not required when the change involves a reduction of
any component of a finance charge or other charge or when the change results from an
agreement involving a court proceeding. If the creditor prohibits additional extensions of credit
or reduces the credit limit in certain circumstances (if permitted by contract), a written notice
must be provided no later than three business days after the action is taken and must include the
specific reasons for the action. If the creditor requires the consumer to request reinstatement of
credit privileges, the notice also must state that fact.
6 For the following formulas, the APR cannot be determined if the applicable balance is zero. (§1026.14(c)(2))
7 Loan fees, points, or similar finance charges that relate to the opening of the account must not be included in the calculation of
the APR.
8 The sum of the balances may include the average daily balance, adjusted balance, or previous balance method. When a portion
of the finance charge is determined by application of one or more daily periodic rates, the sum of the balances also means the
average of daily balances. See Appendix F to Regulation Z.
9 Cannot be less than the highest periodic rate applied, expressed as an APR. Loan fees, points, or similar finance charges that
relate to the opening of the account must not be included in the calculation of the APR.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 23
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Timely Settlement of Estates – Section 1026.11(c)
Issuers are required to establish procedures to ensure that any administrator of an estate can
resolve the outstanding credit card balance of a deceased account holder in a timely manner. If
an administrator requests the amount of the balance:
• The issuer is prohibited from imposing additional fees on the account;
• The issuer is required to disclose the amount of the balance to the administrator in a timely
manner (safe harbor of 30 days); and
• If the balance is paid in full within 30 days after disclosure of the balance, the issuer must
waive or rebate any trailing or residual interest charges that accrued on the balance following
the disclosure.
Minimum Payments – Section 1026.7(b)(12)
For credit card accounts under an open-end credit plan, card issuers generally must disclose on
periodic statements an estimate of the amount of time and the total cost (principal and interest)
involved in paying the balance in full by making only the minimum payments, and an estimate of
the monthly payment amount required to pay off the balance in 36 months and the total cost
(principal and interest) of repaying the balance in 36 months. Card issuers also must disclose a
minimum payment warning, and an estimate of the total interest that a consumer would save if
that consumer repaid the balance in 36 months, instead of making minimum payments.
Advertising for Open-End Plans– Section 1026.16
The regulation requires that loan product advertisements provide accurate and balanced
information, in a clear and conspicuous manner, about rates, monthly payments, and other loan
features. The advertising rules ban several deceptive or misleading advertising practices,
including representations that a rate or payment is “fixed” when in fact it can change.
If an advertisement for credit states specific credit terms, it must state only those terms that
actually are or will be arranged or offered by the creditor. If any finance charges or other charges
are set forth in an advertisement, the advertisement must also clearly and conspicuously state the
following:
• Any minimum, fixed, transaction, activity or similar charge that is a finance charge under
section 1026.4 that could be imposed;
• Any periodic rate that may be applied expressed as an APR as determined under section
1026.14(b). If the plan provides for a variable periodic rate, that fact must be disclosed; and
• Any membership or participation fee that could be imposed.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 24
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
If any finance charges or other charge or payment terms are set forth, affirmatively or negatively,
in an advertisement for a home-equity plan subject to the requirements of section 1026.40, the
advertisement also must clearly and conspicuously set forth the following:
• Any loan fee that is a percentage of the credit limit under the plan and an estimate of any
other fees imposed for opening the plan, stated as a single dollar amount or a reasonable
range;
• Any periodic rate used to compute the finance charge, expressed as an APR as determined
under section 1026.14(b); and
• The maximum APR that may be imposed in a variable-rate plan.
Regulation Z’s open-end home-equity plan advertising rules include a clear and conspicuous
standard for home-equity plan advertisements, consistent with the approach taken in the
advertising rules for consumer leases under Regulation M. Commentary provisions clarify how
the clear and conspicuous standard applies to advertisements of home-equity plans with
promotional rates or payments, and to Internet, television, and oral advertisements of home-
equity plans. The regulation allows alternative disclosures for television and radio
advertisements for home-equity plans. The regulation also requires that advertisements
adequately disclose not only promotional plan terms, but also the rates or payments that will
apply over the term of the plan.
Regulation Z also contains provisions implementing the Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and
Consumer Protection Act of 2005, which requires disclosure of the tax implications of certain
home-equity plans.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 25
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Subpart C – Closed-End Credit
Subpart C relates to closed-end credit. It contains rules on disclosures (§§1026.17-.20), treatment
of credit balances (§1026.21), annual percentage rate calculations (§1026.22), rescission rights
(§1026.23), and advertising (§1026.24).
The TILA-RESPA integrated disclosures must be given for most closed-end transactions secured
by real property for which the creditor receives an application on or after August 1, 2015. The
TILA-RESPA integrated disclosures do not apply to HELOCs, reverse mortgages, or mortgages
secured by a mobile home or by a dwelling that is not attached to real property. Truth in Lending
disclosures (TIL disclosures) and the Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages
(CHARM) booklet must still be provided for certain limited closed-end loan transactions.
I. Disclosures, Generally
A. Timing
Generally, all disclosures provided to consumers must be made clearly and conspicuously in
writing, in a form that the consumer may keep ((§§1026.17(a), 1026.37(o), 1026.38(t)).
However, the timing of the disclosures may change depending on the transaction (§§1026.19(a),
1026.19(e)(1)(iii), 1026.19(f)(1)(ii), 1026.19(g)).
Disclosures in connection with non-mortgage closed-end loans and specified housing assistance
loan programs for low- and moderate-income consumers must be provided before consummation
of the transaction (§§1026.3(h), 1026.17(b) and 1026.18)).
For most closed-end transactions secured by real property for which the creditor receives an
application on or after August 1, 2015 (including construction-only loans, loans secured by
vacant land or by 25 or more acres, and credit extended to certain trusts for tax or estate planning
purposes), disclosures must be provided in accordance with the timing requirements outlined in
12 CFR 1026.19(e), (f) and (g). Generally, a creditor is required to mail or deliver the Loan
Estimate within three business days of receipt of the consumer’s loan application and to ensure
that the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure no later than three business days before loan
consummation (§§1026.19(e)(iii), 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)). If the loan is a purchase transaction, the
special information booklet must also be provided within three business days of receipt of the
consumer’s application (§1026.19(g)). The specifics of these disclosure timing requirements are
further discussed below, including a discussion about revised disclosures.
Mortgage loans not subject to 12 CFR 1026.19(e) and (f) (e.g., reverse mortgages, and chattel-
dwelling loans) have different disclosure requirements. For reverse mortgages, disclosures must
be delivered or mailed to the consumer no later than the third business day after a creditor
receives the consumer’s written application (§1026.19(a)). For chattel-dwelling mortgage loans,
disclosures must be provided to the consumer prior to consummation of the loan (§1026.17(b)).
Revised disclosures are also required within three business days of consummation if certain
mortgage loan terms change (§1026.19(a)(2)). For loans like reverse mortgages, the consumer
CFPB April 2015 TILA 26
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
will receive the Good Faith Estimate (GFE), HUD-1 Settlement Statement (HUD-1), and Truth
in Lending disclosures as required under the applicable sections of both TILA and RESPA.
Consumers receive TIL disclosures for chattel-dwelling loans that are not secured by land, but
the GFE and the HUD-1 are not required. Finally, certain variable rate transactions secured by a
dwelling have additional disclosure obligations with specific timing requirements both prior to
and after consummation (see §§1026.20(c) and (d) below).
B. Basis for Disclosures
1. Generally
Disclosures provided for closed-end transactions must reflect the credit terms to which the
parties will be legally bound as of the outset of the credit transaction. If information required for
the disclosures is unknown, the creditor may provide the consumer with an estimate, using the
best information reasonably available. The disclosure must be clearly marked as an estimate.
Variable and Adjustable Rate
If the terms of the legal obligation allow the financial institution, after consummation of the
transaction, to increase the APR, the financial institution must furnish the consumer with certain
information on variable rates. Variable rate disclosures are not applicable to rate increases
resulting from delinquency, default, assumption, acceleration, or transfer of the collateral.
Some of the more important transaction-specific variable rate disclosure requirements follow.
• Disclosures for variable rate loans must be given for the full term of the transaction and must
be based on the terms in effect at the time of consummation.
• If the variable rate transaction includes either a seller buy-down that is reflected in a contract
or a consumer buy-down, the disclosed APR should be a composite rate based on the lower
rate for the buy-down period and the rate that is the basis for the variable rate feature for the
remainder of the term.
• If the initial rate is not determined by the index or formula used to make later interest rate
adjustments, as in a discounted variable rate transaction, the disclosed APR must reflect a
composite rate based on the initial rate for as long as it is applied and, for the remainder of
the term, the rate that would have been applied using the index or formula at the time of
consummation (i.e., the fully indexed rate).
If a loan contains a rate or payment cap that would prevent the initial rate or payment, at
o
the time of the adjustment, from changing to the fully indexed rate, the effect of that rate
or payment cap needs to be reflected in the disclosures.
The index at consummation need not be used if the contract provides a delay in the
o
implementation of changes in an index value (e.g., the contract indicates that future rate
changes are based on the index value in effect for some specified period, like 45 days
before the change date). Instead, the financial institution may use any rate from the date
CFPB April 2015 TILA 27
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
of consummation back to the beginning of the specified period (e.g., during the previous
45-day period).
• If the initial interest rate is set according to the index or formula used for later adjustments,
but is set at a value as of a date before consummation, disclosures should be based on the
initial interest rate, even though the index may have changed by the consummation date.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 28
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
II. Finance Charge, Amount Financed and APRs
A. Finance Charge – Section 1026.18(c)
The aggregate total amount of the finance charge must be disclosed for all loans. An itemization
of the amount financed is required (except as provided in 12 CFR 1026.18(c)(2) or (c)(3)), unless
the loan is subject to 12 CFR 1026.19(e) and (f) (i.e., most closed-end mortgage loans).
Amount Financed – Section 1026.18(b), 1026.38(o)
1. Definition
The amount financed is the net amount of credit extended for the consumer’s use. It should not
be assumed that the amount financed under the regulation is equivalent to the note amount,
proceeds, or principal amount of the loan. The amount financed normally equals the total of
payments less the finance charge.
To calculate the amount financed, all amounts and charges connected with the transaction, either
paid separately or included in the note amount, must first be identified. Any prepaid,
precomputed, or other finance charge must then be determined.
The amount financed must not include any finance charges. If finance charges have been
included in the obligation (either prepaid or precomputed), they must be subtracted from the face
amount of the obligation when determining the amount financed. The resulting value must be
reduced further by an amount equal to any prepaid finance charge paid separately. The final
resulting value is the amount financed.
When calculating the amount financed, finance charges (whether in the note amount or paid
separately) should not be subtracted more than once from the total amount of an obligation.
Charges not in the note amount and not included in the finance charge (e.g., an appraisal fee paid
separately in cash on a real estate loan) are not required to be disclosed under Regulation Z and
must not be included in the amount financed.
In a multiple advance construction loan, proceeds placed in a temporary escrow account and
awaiting disbursement in draws to the developer are not considered part of the amount financed
until actually disbursed. Thus, if the entire commitment amount is disbursed into the lender’s
escrow account, the lender must not base disclosures on the assumption that all funds were
disbursed immediately, even if the lender pays interest on the escrowed funds.
2. Calculating the Amount Financed
A consumer signs a note secured by real property in the amount of $5,435. The note amount
includes $5,000 in proceeds disbursed to the consumer, $400 in precomputed interest, $25 paid
to a credit reporting agency for a credit report, and a $10 service charge. Additionally, the
consumer pays a $50 loan fee separately in cash at consummation. The consumer has no other
debt with the financial institution. The amount financed is $4,975.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 29
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
The amount financed may be calculated by first subtracting all finance charges included in the
note amount ($5,435 - $400 - $10 = $5,025). The $25 credit report fee is not a finance charge
because the loan is secured by real property. The $5,025 is further reduced by the amount of
prepaid finance charges paid separately, for an amount financed of $5,025 - $50 = $4,975. The
answer is the same whether finance charges included in the obligation are considered prepaid or
precomputed finance charges.
The financial institution may treat the $10 service charge as an addition to the loan amount and not
as a prepaid finance charge. If it does, the loan principal would be $5,000. The $5,000 loan
principal does not include either the $400 or the $10 precomputed finance charge in the note. The
loan principal is increased by other amounts that are financed which are not part of the finance
charge (the $25 credit report fee) and reduced by any prepaid finance charges (the $50 loan fee, not
the $10 service charge) to arrive at the amount financed of $5,000 + $25 - $50 = $4,975.
Conversely, the financial institution may treat the $10 service charge as a prepaid finance charge.
If it does, the loan principal would be $5,010. The $5,010 loan principal does not include the
$400 precomputed finance charge. The loan principal is increased by other amounts that are
financed which are not part of the finance charge (the $25 credit report fee) and reduced by any
prepaid finance charges (the $50 loan fee and the $10 service charge withheld from loan
proceeds) to arrive at the same amount financed of $5,010 + $25 - $50- $10 = $4,975.
B. Payment Schedule – Section 1026.18(g)
For transactions that are not subject to 12 CFR 1026.19(e) and (f), the disclosed payment
schedule must reflect all components of the finance charge. It includes all payments scheduled to
repay loan principal, interest on the loan, and any other finance charge payable by the consumer
after consummation of the transaction.
However, any finance charge paid separately before or at consummation (e.g., odd days’ interest)
is not part of the payment schedule. It is a prepaid finance charge that must be reflected as a
reduction in the value of the amount financed.
At the creditor’s option, the payment schedule may include amounts beyond the amount financed
and finance charge (e.g., certain insurance premiums or real estate escrow amounts such as taxes
added to payments). However, when calculating the APR, the creditor must disregard such amounts.
If the obligation is a renewable balloon payment instrument that unconditionally obligates the
financial institution to renew the short-term loan at the consumer’s option or to renew the loan
subject to conditions within the consumer’s control, the payment schedule must be disclosed
using the longer term of the renewal period or periods. The long-term loan must be disclosed
with a variable rate feature.
If there are no renewal conditions or if the financial institution guarantees to renew the obligation
in a refinancing, the payment schedule must be disclosed using the shorter balloon payment term.
The short-term loan must be disclosed as a fixed rate loan, unless it contains a variable rate
feature during the initial loan term.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 30
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
C. Annual Percentage Rate (Closed-End Credit) – Section
1026.22
1. Calculating the Annual Percentage Rate – Section 1026.22
The APR must be determined under one of the following:
• The actuarial method, which is defined by Regulation Z and explained in appendix J to the
regulation.
• The U.S. Rule, which is permitted by Regulation Z and briefly explained in appendix J to the
regulation. The U.S. Rule is an accrual method that seems to have first surfaced officially in
an early nineteenth century United States Supreme Court case, Story v. Livingston, 38 U.S.
359 (1839).
Whichever method is used by the financial institution, the rate calculated will be accurate if it is
able to “amortize” the amount financed while it generates the finance charge under the accrual
method selected. Financial institutions also may rely on minor irregularities and accuracy
tolerances in the regulation, both of which effectively permit somewhat imprecise, but still legal,
APRs to be disclosed.
2. Accuracy Tolerances
The disclosed APR on a closed-end transaction is accurate for:
• Regular transactions (which include any single advance transaction with equal payments and
equal payment periods, or an irregular first payment period and/or a first or last irregular
payment), if it is within one-eighth of 1 percentage point of the APR calculated under
Regulation Z (§1026.22(a)(2)).
• Irregular transactions (which include multiple advance transactions and other transactions not
considered regular), if it is within one-quarter of 1 percentage point of the APR calculated
under Regulation Z (§1026.22(a)(3)).
• Mortgage transactions, if it is within one-eighth of 1 percentage point for regular transactions
or one-quarter of 1 percentage point for irregular transactions or if:
i. The rate results from the disclosed finance charge, and:
(A) The disclosed finance is considered accurate under 12 CFR 1026.18(d)(1) or
1026.38(o)(2), as applicable; or
(B) The disclosed finance charge is calculated incorrectly but is considered accurate
for purposes of rescission, under 12 CFR 1026.23(g) or (h), whichever applies.
(§1026.22(a)(4))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 31
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
ii. The disclosed finance charge is calculated incorrectly but is considered accurate under 12
CFR 1026.18(d)(1) or 1026.38(o)(2), as applicable, or 12 CFR 1026.23 (g) or (h), and
either:
(A) The finance charge is understated and the disclosed APR is also understated but
is closer to the actual APR than the APR that would be considered accurate
under section 1026.22(a)(4); or
(B) The disclosed finance charge is overstated and the disclosed APR is also
overstated but is closer to the actual APR than the APR that would be
considered accurate under section 1026.22(a)(4).
For example, in an irregular transaction subject to a tolerance of ¼th of 1 percentage
point, if the actual APR is 9.00% and a $75 omission from the finance charge
corresponds to a rate of 8.50% that is considered accurate under section 1026.22(a)(4), a
disclosed APR of 8.65% is considered accurate under section 1026.22(a)(5). However, a
disclosed APR below 8.50% or above 9.25% would not be considered accurate.
3. Construction Loans – Section 1026.17(c)(6) & Appendix D
Construction and certain other multiple advance loans pose special problems in computing the
finance charge and APR. In many instances, the amount and dates of advances are not
predictable with certainty since they depend on the progress of the work. Regulation Z provides
that the APR and finance charge for such loans may be estimated for disclosure.
At its option, the financial institution may rely on the representations of other parties to acquire
necessary information (for example, it might look to the consumer for the dates of advances). In
addition, if either the amounts or dates of advances are unknown (even if some of them are
known), the financial institution may, at its option, use appendix D to the regulation to make
calculations and disclosures. The finance charge and payment schedule obtained through
appendix D may be used with volume one of the CFPB’s APR tables or with any other
appropriate computation tool to determine the APR. If the financial institution elects not to use
appendix D, or if appendix D cannot be applied to a loan (e.g., appendix D does not apply to a
combined construction-permanent loan if the payments for the permanent loan begin during the
construction period), the financial institution must make its estimates under section
1026.17(c)(2) and calculate the APR using multiple advance formulas.
On loans involving a series of advances under an agreement to extend credit up to a certain
amount, a financial institution may treat all of the advances as a single transaction or disclose
each advance as a separate transaction. If advances are disclosed separately, disclosures must
be provided before each advance occurs, with the disclosures for the first advance provided
before consummation.
In a transaction that finances the construction of a dwelling that may or will be permanently
financed by the same financial institution, the construction-permanent financing phases may be
disclosed in one of three ways listed below.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 32
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• As a single transaction, with one disclosure combining both phases.
• As two separate transactions, with one disclosure for each phase.
• As more than two transactions, with one disclosure for each advance and one for the
permanent financing phase.
If two or more disclosures are furnished, buyer’s points or similar amounts imposed on the
consumer may be allocated among the transactions in any manner the financial institution
chooses, as long as the charges are not applied more than once. In addition, if the financial
institution chooses to give two sets of disclosures and the consumer is obligated for both
construction and permanent phases at the outset, both sets of disclosures must be given to the
consumer initially, before consummation of each transaction occurs.
If the creditor requires interest reserves for construction loans, special appendix D rules apply
that can make the disclosure calculations quite complicated. The amount of interest reserves
included in the commitment amount must not be treated as a prepaid finance charge.
If the lender uses appendix D for construction-only loans with required interest reserves, the
lender must estimate construction interest using the interest reserve formula in appendix D. The
lender’s own interest reserve values must be completely disregarded for disclosure purposes.
If the lender uses appendix D for combination construction-permanent loans, the calculations can
be much more complex. Appendix D is used to estimate the construction interest, which is then
measured against the lender’s contractual interest reserves.
If the interest reserve portion of the lender’s contractual commitment amount exceeds the
amount of construction interest estimated under appendix D, the excess value is considered part
of the amount financed if the lender has contracted to disburse those amounts whether they
ultimately are needed to pay for accrued construction interest. If the lender will not disburse the
excess amount if it is not needed to pay for accrued construction interest, the excess amount must
be ignored for disclosure purposes.
4. 360-Day and 365-Day Years – Section 1026.17(c)(3)
Confusion often arises over whether to use the 360-day or 365-day year in computing interest,
particularly when the finance charge is computed by applying a daily rate to an unpaid balance.
Many single payment loans or loans payable on demand are in this category. There are also loans
in this category that call for periodic installment payments. Regulation Z does not require the use
of one method of interest computation in preference to another (although state law may). It does,
however, permit financial institutions to disregard the fact that months have different numbers of
days when calculating and making disclosures. This means financial institutions may base their
disclosures on calculation tools that assume all months have an equal number of days, even if
their practice is to take account of the variations in months to collect interest.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 33
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
For example, a financial institution may calculate disclosures using a financial calculator based
on a 360-day year with 30-day months, when, in fact, it collects interest by applying a factor of
1/365 of the annual interest rate to actual days.
Disclosure violations may occur, however, when a financial institution applies a daily interest
factor based on a 360-day year to the actual number of days between payments. In those
situations, the financial institution must disclose the higher values of the finance charge, the
APR, and the payment schedule resulting from this practice.
For example, a 12 percent simple interest rate divided by 360 days results in a daily rate of
.033333 percent. If no charges are imposed except interest, and the amount financed is the same
as the loan amount, applying the daily rate on a daily basis for a 365-day year on a $10,000 one
year, single payment, unsecured loan results in an APR of 12.17 percent (.033333% x 365 =
12.17%), and a finance charge of $1,216.67. There would be a violation if the APR were
disclosed as 12 percent or if the finance charge were disclosed as $1,200 (12% x $10,000).
However, if there are no other charges except interest, the application of a 360-day year daily
rate over 365 days on a regular loan would not result in an APR in excess of the one eighth of
one percentage point APR tolerance unless the nominal interest rate is greater than 9 percent. For
irregular loans, with one-quarter of 1 percentage point APR tolerance, the nominal interest rate
would have to be greater than 18 percent to exceed the tolerance.
NOTE: Notwithstanding the APR tolerance, a creditor’s disclosures must reflect the terms of the
legal obligation between the parties (§1026.17(c)(1)), and the APR must be determined in
accordance with either the actuarial method or the U.S. Rule method (§1026.22(a)(1)). A creditor
may not ignore, for disclosure purposes, the effects of applying a 360-day year daily rate over
365 days. (Comment 1026.17(c)(3)-1.ii)
D. Required Deposit – Section 1026.18(r)
A required deposit, with certain exceptions, is one that the financial institution requires the
consumer to maintain as a condition of the specific credit transaction. It can include a
compensating balance or a deposit balance that secures the loan. The effect of a required deposit
is not reflected in the APR. Also, a required deposit is not a finance charge since it is eventually
released to the consumer. A deposit that earns at least 5 percent per year need not be considered
a required deposit.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 34
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
III. Transactions with TILA-RESPA Integrated
Disclosures - Generally
On December 31, 2013, the CFPB published a final rule implementing Sections 1098(2) and
1100A(5) of the Dodd-Frank Act, which directed the CFPB to publish a single, integrated
disclosure for mortgage loan transactions, which includes mortgage loan disclosure requirements
under TILA and sections 4 and 5 of RESPA. The amendments in the final rule, referred to as the
“TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure Rule” or “TRID,” are applicable to covered closed-end
mortgage loans for which a creditor or mortgage broker receives an application on or after
August 1, 2015. As a result, Regulation Z now houses the integrated forms, timing, and related
disclosure requirements for most closed-end consumer mortgage loans.
The new integrated disclosures are not used to disclose information about reverse mortgages, home
equity lines of credit (HELOCs), chattel-dwelling loans such as loans secured by a mobile home or
by a dwelling that is not attached to real property (i.e., land), or other transactions not covered by
the TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure Rule. The final rule also does not apply to loans made by a
creditor who makes five or fewer mortgages in a year. Creditors originating these types of
mortgages must continue to use, as applicable, the GFE, HUD-1, and TIL disclosures.
Most closed-end mortgage loans are exempt from the requirement to provide the GFE, HUD-1,
and servicing disclosure requirements of 12 CFR 1024.6, 1024.7, 1024.8, 1024.10, and
1024.33(a). Instead, these loans are subject to disclosure, timing, and other requirements under
TILA and Regulation Z. Specifically, the aforementioned provisions do not apply to the
following federally related mortgage loans:
• Loans subject to the special disclosure (TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure) requirements
for certain closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by real property set forth in 12
CFR 1026.19(e), (f), and (g); or
• Certain no-interest loans secured by subordinate liens made for the purpose of down payment
or similar home buyer assistance, property rehabilitation assistance, energy efficiency
assistance, or foreclosure avoidance or prevention. (§1026.3(h))
NOTE: A creditor may not use the TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure forms instead of the
GFE, HUD-1, and TIL forms for transactions that continue to be covered by TILA or RESPA
that require those disclosures (e.g., reverse mortgages).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 35
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Summary of Applicable Disclosure Requirements:
Use TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosures Continue to use existing TIL and RESPA
(See Regulation Z): disclosures (as applicable):
• Most closed-end mortgage loans, • HELOCs (subject to disclosure
including: requirements under 12 CFR 1026.40)
Construction-only loans • Reverse mortgages10 (subject to
o
existing TIL and GFE disclosures)
Loans secured by vacant land or by
o
25 or more acres • Chattel-secured mortgages (i.e.,
mortgages secured by a mobile home or
by a dwelling that is not attached to real
property, such as land) (subject to
existing TIL disclosures, and not
RESPA)
NOTE: In both cases, there is a partial exemption from these disclosures under 12 CFR
1026.3(h) for loans secured by subordinate liens and associated with certain housing
assistance loan programs for low- and moderate-income persons.
Creditors making closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by real property, and subject to
the provisions of 12 CFR 1026.19(e) and (f), must provide consumers with a Loan Estimate under
12 CFR 1026.37, Closing Disclosure under 12 CFR 1026.38, the special information booklet as
required by RESPA, under 12 CFR 1026.19(g), and, as applicable for ARM transactions, the
CHARM booklet. The special information booklet is described in further detail below.
A. Early disclosures (Loan Estimate) – Section
1026.19(e)
Section 1026.19(e) requires the creditor to provide good faith estimates of the Loan Estimate
disclosures required by 12 CFR 1026.37 (see subpart E for information on the content, form, and
format of the disclosure). The creditor generally must deliver or place in the mail the Loan
Estimate no later than three business days after receiving the consumer’s application, and no
later than seven business days before consummation. (§1026.19(e)(1)(i) and (iii))
Generally, the creditor is responsible for ensuring that the Loan Estimate and its delivery meet
the rule’s content, delivery, and timing requirements. (See §§1026.19(e) and 1026.37.) If a
mortgage broker receives a consumer’s application, the mortgage broker may provide the Loan
Estimate to the consumer on the creditor’s behalf. If it does so, the mortgage broker must comply
with all requirements of 12 CFR 1026.19(e), as well as the three-year record retention
requirements in 12 CFR 1026.25(c). (§1026.19(e)(1)(ii)) The creditor is expected to maintain
communication with mortgage brokers to ensure that the Loan Estimate and its delivery satisfy
10
An open-end reverse mortgage receives open-end disclosures, not a GFE or HUD-1.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 36
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
the rule’s requirements, and the creditor is legally responsible for any errors or defects.
(§1026.19(e)(1)(ii); Comment 19(e)(1)(ii) -1 and -2)
Timing – Loan Estimate – early disclosures. The Loan Estimate must be delivered or placed in
the mail to the consumer no later than the third business day after the creditor or mortgage broker
receives the consumer’s application for a mortgage loan. (§1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(A)) If the Loan
Estimate is not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer is considered to have received
the Loan Estimate three business days after it is delivered or placed in the mail (this applies to
electronic delivery as well). (§1026.19(e)(1)(iv); Comment 19(e)(1)(iv)-2). Other than for
transactions secured by a consumer’s interest in a timeshare plan, the Loan Estimate must be
delivered or placed in the mail no later than the seventh business day before consummation
(§1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(B) and (C)).
For purposes of the TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosures rule, an “application” is defined in 12
CFR 1026.2(a)(3)(ii). For transactions subject to 12 CFR 1026.19(e), (f), or (g), an application
consists of the submission of the following six pieces of information:
• The consumer’s name;
• The consumer’s income;
• The consumer’s social security number to obtain a credit report;
• The property address;
• An estimate of the value of the property; and
• The mortgage loan amount sought.
This definition of application is similar to the definition under Regulation X (§1024.2(b)), except
that it does not include the seventh “catch-all” element of that definition, that is, “any other
information deemed necessary by the loan originator.”
An application may be submitted in written or electronic format, and includes a written record of
an oral application. (Comment 2(a)(3)-1)
This definition of application does not prevent a creditor from collecting whatever additional
information it deems necessary in connection with the request for the extension of credit.
However, once a consumer has submitted11 the six pieces of information discussed above to the
creditor for purposes of obtaining an extension of credit, the creditor has an application for
purposes of the requirement for delivery of the Loan Estimate to the consumer and must abide by
the three business day timing requirement. (Comment 2(a)(3)-1)
11
When a consumer uses an online application system that allows the information to be saved, the application must be submitted
before the Loan Estimate timing requirements are triggered.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 37
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
If the creditor determines, within the three business day period, that the consumer’s application
will not or cannot be approved on the terms requested by the consumer, or if the consumer
withdraws the application within that period, the creditor does not have to provide the Loan
Estimate. However, if the creditor does not provide the Loan Estimate, it will not have complied
with the Loan Estimate requirements if it later consummates the transaction on the terms
originally applied for by the consumer. If a consumer amends an application and a creditor
determines the amended application may proceed, then the creditor is required to comply with
the Loan Estimate requirements, including delivering or mailing a Loan Estimate within three
business days of receiving the amended or resubmitted application. (Comment 19(e)(1)(iii)-3)
A “business day” for purposes of providing the Loan Estimate is a day on which the creditor’s
offices are open to the public for carrying out substantially all of its business functions.
(Comment 19(e)(1)(iii)-1, §1026.2(a)(6))
NOTE: The term “business day” is defined differently for other purposes, including counting
days to ensure the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure on time. (§§1026.2(a)(6),
1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(B) and (e)(1)(iv), and 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and (f)(1)(iii)) For these other
purposes, business day means all calendar days except Sundays and the legal public holidays
specified in 5 U.S.C. 6103(a). (§1026.2(a)(6); Comment 2(a)(6)-2; Comments 19(e)(1)(iii)-1 and
19(f)(1)(ii)-1)
Creditors are required to act in good faith and exercise due diligence in obtaining information
necessary to complete the Loan Estimate. (Comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1) Normally, creditors may rely
on the representations of other parties in obtaining information. (§1026.17(c)(2)(i))
NOTE: There may be some information that is not reasonably available to the creditor at the time
the Loan Estimate is made. In these instances, except as otherwise provided in 12 CFR 1026.19,
1026.37, and 1026.38, the creditor may use estimates even though it knows that more precise
information will be available by the point of consummation. However, new disclosures may be
required under 12 CFR 1026.17(f) or 1026.19. (Comment 17(c)(2)(i)-1) When estimated figures
are used, they must be designated as such on the Loan Estimate. (Comment 17(c)(2)(i)-2)
The consumer may modify or waive the seven business day waiting period after receiving the
Loan Estimate if the consumer determines that the mortgage loan is needed to meet a bona fide
personal financial emergency that necessitates consummating the credit transaction before the
end of the waiting period. (§1026.19(e)(1)(v)) Whether a consumer has a bona fide personal
financial emergency is determined by the facts surrounding the consumer’s individual situation.
One example is the imminent sale of the consumer’s home at foreclosure, where the foreclosure
sale will proceed unless loan proceeds are made available to the consumer during the waiting
period. (§1026.19(e)(1)(v); Comment 19(e)(1)(v)-1). To modify or waive the waiting period, the
consumer must give the creditor a dated written statement that describes the emergency,
specifically modifies or waives the waiting period, and is signed by all consumers primarily
liable on the legal obligation. (§1026.19(e)(1)(v)) The creditor may not provide the consumer
with a pre-printed waiver form. (§1026.19(e)(1)(v))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 38
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Good faith requirement and tolerances. Creditors are responsible for ensuring that the figures
stated in the Loan Estimate are made in good faith and consistent with the best information
reasonably available to the creditor at the time they are disclosed. (§1026.19(e)(3); Comment
19(e)(3)(iii)-1 through -3) Whether or not a Loan Estimate was made in good faith is determined
by calculating the difference between the estimated charges originally provided in the Loan
Estimate and the actual charges paid by or imposed on the consumer in the Closing Disclosure.
(§1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii)). Generally, if the charge paid by or imposed on the consumer exceeds
the amount originally disclosed on the Loan Estimate, it is not in good faith. (§1026.19(e)(3)(i))
As long as the creditor’s estimate is consistent with the best information reasonably available,
and the creditor charges the consumer less than the amount disclosed on the Loan Estimate, the
Loan Estimate is considered to be in good faith. (§1026.19(e)(3)(i))
The general rule is that the estimated closing cost is in good faith if the charge does not exceed
the amount disclosed in the Loan Estimate. Unless there is an exception, the creditor may not
charge more than the amounts disclosed on the Loan Estimate. (§1026.19(e)(3)(i) A creditor may
charge the consumer more than the amount disclosed in the Loan Estimate, and the estimate may
still be considered to be in good faith in specific circumstances. For certain charges, there are
different tolerances when charges exceed the amounts disclosed.
Zero tolerance. For charges other than those that are specifically excepted, as noted below,
creditors may not charge consumers more than the amount disclosed on the Loan Estimate, other
than for changed circumstances that permit a revised Loan Estimate. (§1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (iv)
The zero tolerance charges include but are not limited to the following:
• Fees paid to the creditor, mortgage broker, or an affiliate of either (§1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(B));
• Fees paid to an unaffiliated third party if the creditor did not permit the consumer to shop for
a third-party service provider for a settlement service (§1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(C)) or transfer
taxes. (Comments 19(e)(3)(i)-1 and -4)
10% Cumulative tolerance. Charges for third-party services and recording fees paid by or
imposed on the consumer are grouped together and are subject to a 10% cumulative tolerance.
This means the creditor may charge the consumer more than the amount disclosed on the Loan
Estimate for any of these charges so long as the total sum of the charges added together does not
exceed the sum of all such charges disclosed on the Loan Estimate by more than 10%.
(§1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(A)). These charges are:
• Recording fees (Comment 19(e)(3)(ii)-4);
• Charges for third-party services where:
The charge is not paid to the creditor or the creditor’s affiliate (§1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(B)); and
o
The consumer is permitted by the creditor to shop for the third-party service, and the
o
consumer selects a third-party service provider on the creditor’s written list of service
providers. (§1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(C); §1026.19(e)(1)(vi); Comment 19(e)(1)(vi)-1 through 7))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 39
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Variances permitted without tolerance limits. Creditors may charge consumers more than the
amount disclosed on the Loan Estimate without any tolerance limitation for certain costs or
terms, but only if the original estimated charge, or lack of an estimated charge for a particular
service, was based on the best information reasonably available to the creditor at the time the
disclosure was provided. (§1026.19(e)(3)(iii)) These charges are:
• Prepaid interest; property insurance premiums; amounts placed into an escrow, impound,
reserve or similar account. (§1026.19(e)(3)(iii)(A)-(C))
• For services required by the creditor if the creditor permits the consumer to shop and the
consumer selects a third-party service provider not on the creditor’s written list of service
providers. (§1026.19(e)(3)(iii)(D))
• Charges paid to third-party service providers for services not required by the creditor (may be
paid to affiliates of the creditor). (§1026.19(e)(3)(iii)(E))
List of services for which a consumer may shop. In addition to the Loan Estimate, if the
consumer is permitted to shop for a settlement service, the creditor, no later than three business
days after receiving the application, must provide the consumer with a written list of services for
which the consumer can shop. This list must:
• Identify at least one available settlement service provider for each service, and
• State that the consumer may choose a different provider of that service.
(§1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(C) and (e)(1)(vi)(C))
NOTE: When a creditor allows a consumer to shop for a third-party service and the
consumer chooses a service provider not identified on the creditor’s list, the charge is not
subject to a tolerance limitation.
Refunds within 60 days of consummation. If the amounts paid by the consumer at closing exceed
the amounts disclosed on the Loan Estimate beyond the applicable tolerance threshold, the
creditor must refund the excess to the consumer no later than 60 calendar days after
consummation. (§1026.19(f)(2)(v))
• For charges subject to zero tolerance, any amount charged beyond the amount disclosed on
the Loan Estimate must be refunded to the consumer. (§1026.19(e)(3)(i))
• For charges subject to a 10% cumulative tolerance, to the extent the total sum of the charges
added together exceeds the sum of all such charges disclosed on the Loan Estimate by more
than 10%, the difference must be refunded to the consumer. (§1026.19(e)(3)(ii))
Loan Estimate - Revisions and Corrections. Creditors generally are bound by the original Loan
Estimate and must determine the estimate’s good faith by calculating the difference between the
estimated charges originally provided and the actual charges paid by the consumer. For purposes
of determining whether the estimates are in good faith, the creditor may use a revised estimate of
a charge instead of the amount originally disclosed if the revision is due to one of the reasons set
CFPB April 2015 TILA 40
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
out in specific circumstances in 12 CFR 1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) through (F). Specific
circumstances include:
Changed circumstances – increased settlement charges. Changed circumstances that occur
after the Loan Estimate is provided to the consumer that cause estimated settlement charges
to increase more than is permitted under the TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure rule
(§1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A)).
• A creditor may provide and use a revised Loan Estimate redisclosing a settlement charge and
compare that revised estimate to the amount imposed on the consumer for purposes of
determining good faith if changed circumstances cause the estimated charge to increase or, in
the case of charges subject to the 10% cumulative tolerance under 12 CFR 1026.19(e)(3)(ii),
cause the sum of those charges to increase by more than the 10% tolerance.
(§1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A); Comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-1) Examples of changed circumstances
affecting settlement costs include (Comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-2):
A natural disaster that damages the property or otherwise results in additional closing costs;
o
A creditor’s estimate of title insurance is no longer valid because the title insurer goes out
o
of business; or
New information not relied on when the Loan Estimate was provided is discovered, such
o
as a neighbor of the seller filing a claim contesting the property boundary.
Changed circumstances – consumer eligibility. Changed circumstances that occur after the
Loan Estimate is provided to the consumer that affect the consumer’s eligibility for the terms
for which the consumer applied or the value of the security for the loan
(§1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(B)).
NOTE: A changed circumstance permitting a revised Loan Estimate under 12 CFR
1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A) and (B) is:
• An extraordinary event beyond the control of any interested party or other unexpected event
specific to the consumer or transaction (§1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A)(1));
• Information specific to the consumer or transaction that the creditor relied upon when
providing the original Loan Estimate and that was inaccurate or changed after the disclosures
were provided (§1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A)(2)); or
• New information specific to the consumer or transaction that the creditor did not rely on
when providing the original Loan Estimate. (§1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A)(3))
Change in eligibility. A creditor also may provide and use a revised Loan Estimate if a
changed circumstance affected the consumer’s creditworthiness or the value of the security
for the loan and resulted in the consumer being ineligible for an estimated loan term
previously disclosed. (§1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(B) and Comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(B)-1) This may
occur when a changed circumstance causes a change in the consumer’s eligibility for specific
loan terms disclosed on the Loan Estimate, which in turn results in increased cost for a
CFPB April 2015 TILA 41
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
settlement service beyond the applicable tolerance threshold. (Comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(A)-2)
For example:
• The creditor relied on the consumer’s representation to the creditor of a $90,000 annual
income, but underwriting determines that the consumer’s annual income is only $80,000.
• There are two co-applicants applying for a mortgage loan and the creditor relied on a
combined income when providing the Loan Estimate, but one applicant subsequently
becomes unemployed.
Revisions requested by the consumer. The consumer requests revisions to the credit terms or
the settlement that cause the estimated charge to increase. For example, a consumer grants a
power of attorney authorizing a family member to consummate the transaction on the
consumer’s behalf, and the creditor provides revised disclosures reflecting the fee to record
the power of attorney. (Comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(C)-1)
Rate locks after initial Loan Estimate. If the interest rate for the loan was not locked when
the Loan Estimate was provided and, upon being locked at some later time, points or lender
credits for the mortgage loan change, the creditor is required to provide a revised Loan
Estimate no later than three business days after the interest rate is locked and may use the
revised Loan Estimate to compare to points and lender credits charged. The revised Loan
Estimate must reflect the revised interest rate as well as any revisions to the points disclosed
on the Loan Estimate pursuant to 12 CFR 1026.37(f)(1), lender credits, and any other interest
rate dependent charges and terms that have changed due to the new interest rate.
(§1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D); Comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(D)-1)
Expiration of Loan Estimate. If the consumer indicates an intent to proceed with the
transaction more than 10 business days after the Loan Estimate was delivered or placed in the
mail to the consumer, a creditor may use a revised Loan Estimate. (§1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(E);
Comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(E)-1) No justification is required for the change to the original
estimate of a charge other than the lapse of 10 business days.
Construction loans. In addition to the circumstances described above, creditors also may use
a revised Loan Estimate where the transaction involves financing of new construction and the
creditor reasonably expects that settlement will occur more than 60 calendar days after the
original Loan Estimate has been provided. (§1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(F)) Creditors may use revised
Loan Estimates in this circumstance only when the original Loan Estimate clearly and
conspicuously stated that at any time prior to 60 days before consummation, the creditor may
issue revised disclosures. (Comment 19(e)(3)(iv)(F)-1)
NOTE: Section 1026.19(e)(3) does not include technical errors, miscalculations, or
underestimations of charges as reasons for which creditors are permitted to provide revised
Loan Estimates.
Timing – Loan Estimate – revised disclosures. The general rule is that the creditor must deliver
or place in the mail the revised Loan Estimate to the consumer no later than three business days
CFPB April 2015 TILA 42
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
after receiving the information sufficient to establish that one of the reasons for the revision has
occurred. (§1026.19(e)(4)(i); comment 19(e)(4)(i)-1)
The creditor may not provide a revised Loan Estimate on or after the date the creditor provides the
consumer with the Closing Disclosure. (§1026.19(e)(4)(ii); Comment 19(e)(4)(ii)-1.ii) Because the
Closing Disclosure must be received by the consumer no later than three business days before
consummation, this means the consumer must receive a revised Loan Estimate no later than four
business days prior to consummation. (§1026.19(e)(4)(ii); Comment 19(e)(4)(ii)-1.ii)
NOTE: Generally a creditor is required to provide a revised Loan Estimate within three business
days of receiving information sufficient to establish the changed circumstance or other triggering
event (or in the case of a rate lock, the next business day). In some circumstances, the creditor
may already have provided a Closing Disclosure and thus be unable to provide a revised Loan
Estimate. However, if there are less than four business days between the date the creditor would
be required to provide a revised disclosure and consummation, creditors may provide consumers
with a Closing Disclosure reflecting any revised charges resulting from the changed
circumstance and rely on those figures (rather than the amounts disclosed on the Loan Estimate)
for purposes of determining good faith and the applicable tolerance. Comment 19(e)(4)(ii)-1
provides illustrative examples.
Predisclosure activity (§1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A)). A creditor or other person generally may not
impose any fee on a consumer in connection with the consumer’s application for a mortgage
transaction until the consumer has received the Loan Estimate and has indicated intent to proceed
with the transaction. (§1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A)) This restriction includes limits on imposing:
• Application fees;
• Appraisal fees;
• Underwriting fees; and
• Other fees imposed on the consumer.
The only exception to this exclusion is for a bona fide and reasonable fee for obtaining a
consumer’s credit report. (§1026.19(e)(2)(i)(B); Comment 19(e)(2)(i)(A)-1 through -5 and
Comment 19(e)(2)(i)(B)-1)
Documentation of intent to proceed. To satisfy the record retention requirements of §1026.25,
the creditor must document the consumer’s communication of the intent to proceed.
(§1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A)) A consumer indicates intent to proceed with the transaction when the
consumer communicates, in any manner, that the consumer chooses to proceed after the Loan
Estimate has been delivered, unless a particular manner of communication is required by the
creditor. (§1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A)) This may include:
• Oral communication in person immediately upon delivery of the Loan Estimate; or
CFPB April 2015 TILA 43
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Oral communication over the phone, written communication via email, or signing a pre-
printed form after receipt of the Loan Estimate.
A consumer’s silence is not indicative of intent to proceed. (Comment 19(e)(2)(i)(A)-2)
Written information for consumers before the Loan Estimate is provided. (§1026.19(e)(2)(ii)) A
creditor or other person may provide a consumer with estimated terms or costs prior to the
consumer receiving the Loan Estimate, if the person clearly and conspicuously states at the top
of the front of the first page of the written estimate and in font size no smaller than 12-point font
“Your actual rate, payment, and costs could be higher. Get an official Loan Estimate before
choosing the loan.” (§1026.19(e)(2)(ii); Comment 19(e)(2)(ii)-1) In addition, the written estimate
may not have headings, content, and format substantially similar to the Loan Estimate or the
Closing Disclosure. (§1026.19(e)(2)(ii); Comment 19(e)(2)(ii)-1)
The CFPB has provided a model of the required statement in form H-26 of appendix H to
Regulation Z.
Verification of information before the Loan Estimate is provided. A creditor or other person may
not condition providing the Loan Estimate on a consumer submitting documents verifying
information related to the consumer’s mortgage loan application before providing the Loan
Estimate. (§1026.19(e)(2)(iii); comment 19(e)(2)(iii)-1)
B. Final Disclosures (Closing Disclosure) – Section
1026.19(f)
For loans that require a Loan Estimate (i.e., most closed-end mortgage loans secured by real
property) and that proceed to closing, creditors must provide a new final disclosure reflecting the
actual terms of the transaction; it is called the Closing Disclosure. The form integrates and
replaces the HUD-1 and the final TIL disclosure for these transactions. The creditor is generally
required to ensure that the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure no later than three business
days before consummation of the loan. (§1026.19(f)(1)(ii))
NOTE: If the creditor mails the disclosure six business days prior to consummation, it can
assume that it was received three business days after sending. (1026.19(f)(1)(iii); Comment
19(f)(1)(iii))
• The Closing Disclosure generally must contain the actual terms and costs of the transaction.
(§1026.19(f)(1)(i)) Creditors may estimate disclosures using the best information reasonably
available when the actual term or cost is not reasonably available to the creditor at the time
the disclosure is made. However, creditors must act in good faith and use due diligence in
obtaining the information. The creditor normally may rely on the representations of other
parties in obtaining the information, including, for example, the settlement agent. The
creditor is required to provide corrected disclosures containing the actual terms of the
transaction at or before consummation. (Comments 19(f)(1)(i)-2, -2.i, and -2.ii)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 44
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• The Closing Disclosure must be in writing and contain the information prescribed in 12 CFR
1026.38. The creditor must disclose only the specific information set forth in 12 CFR
1026.38(a) through (s), as shown in the CFPB’s form in appendix H-25. (§1026.38(t))
• If the actual terms or costs of the transaction change prior to consummation, the creditor must
provide a corrected disclosure that contains the actual terms of the transaction and complies
with the other requirements of 12 CFR 1026.19(f), including the timing requirements, and
requirements for providing corrected disclosures due to subsequent changes. (Comment
19(f)(1)(i)-1)
• New three-day waiting period. If the creditor provides a corrected disclosure, it must provide
the consumer with an additional three-business-day waiting period prior to consummation if
the annual percentage rate becomes inaccurate, the loan product changes, or a prepayment
penalty is added to the transaction. (§1026.19(f)(2)(ii)
“Consummation” occurs when the consumer becomes contractually obligated to the creditor on
the loan, not, for example, when the consumer becomes contractually obligated to a seller on a
real estate transaction. The time when a consumer becomes contractually obligated to the
creditor on the loan depends on applicable state law. (§1026.2(a)(13) and Comment 2(a)(13)-1)
Timing and Delivery - Closing Disclosure. Generally, the creditor is responsible for ensuring
that the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure form no later than three business days before
consummation. (§1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A); Comment 19(f)(1)(v)-3) The creditor also is responsible
for ensuring that the Closing Disclosure meets the content, delivery, and timing requirements.
(§§1026.19(f) and 1026.38) For timeshare transactions, the creditor must ensure that the
consumer receives the Closing Disclosure no later than consummation. (§1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(B))
If the Closing Disclosure is provided in person, it is considered received by the consumer on the
day it is provided. If it is mailed or delivered electronically, the consumer is considered to have
received the Closing Disclosure three business days after it is delivered or placed in the mail.
(§1026.19(f)(1)(iii); Comment 19(f)(1)(ii)-2)
However, if the creditor has evidence that the consumer received the Closing Disclosure earlier
than three business days after it is mailed or delivered, it may rely on that evidence and consider
it to be received on that date. (Comments 19(f)(1)(iii)-1 and -2)
Multiple consumers. In transactions that are not rescindable, the Closing Disclosure may be
provided to any consumer with primary liability on the obligation. (§1026.17(d)) In rescindable
transactions, the creditor must provide the Closing Disclosure separately and meet the timing
requirements for each consumer who has the right to rescind under TILA (see §1026.23).
Settlement agents. Creditors may contract with settlement agents to have the settlement agent
provide the Closing Disclosure to consumers on the creditor’s behalf, provided that the
settlement agent complies with all relevant requirements of 12 CFR 1026.19(f).
(§1026.19(f)(1)(v)) Creditors and settlement agents also may agree to divide responsibility with
regard to completing the Closing Disclosure, with the settlement agent assuming responsibility to
CFPB April 2015 TILA 45
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
complete some or all the Closing Disclosure. (Comment 19(f)(1)(v)-4) Any such creditor must
maintain communication with the settlement agent to ensure that the Closing Disclosure and its
delivery satisfy the requirements described above, and the creditor is legally responsible for any
errors or defects. (§1026.19(f)(1)(v) and Comment 19(f)(1)(v)-3) In transactions involving a
seller, the settlement agent is required to provide the seller with the Closing Disclosure reflecting
the actual terms of the seller’s transaction no later than the day of consummation.
(§1026.19(f)(4)(i) and (ii))
NOTE: “Business day” has a different meaning for purposes of providing the Closing Disclosure
than it is for purposes of providing the Loan Estimate after receiving a consumer’s application.
For purposes of providing the Closing Disclosure, the term business day means all calendar days
except Sundays and the legal public holidays specified in 5 U.S.C. 6103(a). (See §§1026.2(a)(6),
1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and (f)(1)(iii))
Three-business-day waiting period. The loan may not be consummated less than three business
days after the Closing Disclosure is received by the consumer. If a settlement is scheduled during
the waiting period, the creditor generally must postpone settlement, unless the consumer
determines that the extension of credit is necessary to meet a bona fide personal financial
emergency and waives the waiting period. The written waiver describes the emergency,
specifically modifies or waives the waiting period, and bears the signature of all consumers who
are primarily liable on the legal obligation. Pre-printed forms for this purpose are prohibited.
(§1026.19(f)(1)(iv))
Average charges. In general, the amount imposed on the consumer for any settlement service
must not exceed the amount the settlement service provider actually received for that service.
However, an average charge may be imposed instead of the actual amount received for a
particular service, as long as the average charge satisfies the following conditions
(§1026.19(f)(3)(i)-(ii); Comment 19(f)(3)(i)-1):
• The average charge is no more than the average amount paid for that service by or on behalf
of all consumers and sellers for a class of transactions;
• The creditor or settlement service provider defines the class of transactions based on an
appropriate period of time, geographic area, and type of loan;
• The creditor or settlement service provider uses the same average charge for every
transaction within the defined class; and
• The creditor or settlement service provider does not use an average charge:
For any type of insurance;
o
For any charge based on the loan amount or property value; or
o
If doing so is otherwise prohibited by law.
o
CFPB April 2015 TILA 46
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Closing Disclosures - Revisions and Corrections (§1026.19(f)(2)). Creditors must re-disclose
terms or costs on the Closing Disclosure if certain changes occur to the transaction after the
Closing Disclosure was first provided that cause the disclosures to become inaccurate. There are
three categories of changes that require a corrected Closing Disclosure containing all changed
terms. (§1026.19(f)(2))
• Changes that occur before consummation that require a new three-business-day waiting
period. (§1026.19(f)(2)(ii))
• Changes that occur before consummation and do not require a new three-business-day
waiting period. (§1026.19(f)(2)(i))
• Changes that occur after consummation. (§1026.19(f)(2)(iii))
Changes before consummation requiring new waiting period. If one of the following occurs after
delivery of the Closing Disclosure and before consummation, the creditor must provide a
corrected Closing Disclosure containing all changed terms and ensure that the consumer receives
it no later than three business days before consummation. (§1026.19(f)(2)(ii); Comment
19(f)(2)(ii)-1)
• The disclosed APR becomes inaccurate. If the annual percentage rate (APR) previously
disclosed becomes inaccurate, the creditor must provide a corrected Closing Disclosure with
the corrected APR disclosure and all other terms that have changed. The APR’s accuracy is
determined according to 12 CFR 1026.22. (§1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(A))
• The loan product changes. If the loan product is changed, causing the product description
disclosed to become inaccurate, the creditor must provide a corrected Closing Disclosure
with the corrected loan product and all other terms that have changed. (§1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(B))
• A prepayment penalty is added. If a prepayment penalty is added to the transaction, the
creditor must provide a corrected Closing Disclosure with the prepayment penalty provision
disclosed and all other terms that have changed. (§1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(C))
The consumer may waive this period if the consumer is facing a bona fide personal financial
emergency. (§1026.19(f)(1)(iv))
Changes before consummation not requiring new waiting period; consumer’s right to inspect.
For any other changes before consummation that do not fall under the three categories above
(i.e., related to the APR, loan product, or the addition of a prepayment penalty), the creditor still
must provide a corrected Closing Disclosure with any terms or costs that have changed and
ensure that the consumer receives it. For these changes, there is no additional three-business-day
waiting period required. The creditor must ensure only that the consumer receives the revised
Closing Disclosure at or before consummation. (§1026.19(f)(2)(i); Comment 19(f)(2)(i)-1
through -2)
However, a consumer has the right to inspect the Closing Disclosure during the business day
before consummation. (§1026.19(f)(2)(i)) If a consumer asks to inspect the Closing Disclosure
CFPB April 2015 TILA 47
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
the business day before consummation, the Closing Disclosure presented to the consumer must
reflect any adjustments to the costs or terms that are known to the creditor at the time the
consumer inspects it. (§1026.19(f)(2)(i))
A creditor may satisfy the obligation to provide the Closing Disclosure by ensuring that a
settlement agent that provides a consumer with the disclosures complies with the requirements of
12 CFR 1026.19(f). (§1026.19(f)(1)(v) and Comment 19(f)(2)(i)-2)
Changes due to events occurring after consummation. Creditors must provide a corrected
Closing Disclosure if an event in connection with the settlement occurs during the 30-calendar-
day period after consummation that causes the Closing Disclosure to become inaccurate and
results in a change to an amount paid by the consumer from what was previously disclosed.
(§1026.19(f)(2)(iii); Comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1)
When a post-consummation event requires a corrected Closing Disclosure, the creditor must
deliver or place in the mail a corrected Closing Disclosure not later than 30 calendar days after
receiving information sufficient to establish that such an event has occurred. (§1026.19(f)(2)(iii);
Comment 19(f)(2)(iii)-1) In transactions involving a seller, the settlement agent must provide the
seller with a revised Closing Disclosure if an event occurs within 30 days of consummation that
makes the disclosures inaccurate as they relate to the amount actually paid by the seller. The
settlement agent must deliver or mail a corrected closing disclosure no later than 30 days from
receiving information that establishes the Closing Disclosure is inaccurate and results in a
change to an amount actually paid by the seller from what was previously disclosed.
(§1026.19(f)(4)(ii))
Changes due to clerical errors. The creditor must provide a revised Closing Disclosure to correct
non-numerical clerical errors no later than 60 calendar days after consummation.
(§1026.19(f)(2)(iv)) An error is clerical if it does not affect a numerical disclosure and does not
affect the timing, delivery, or other requirements imposed by 12 CFR 1026.19(e) or (f).
(Comment 19(f)(2)(iv)-1)
Refunds related to the good faith analysis. The creditor can cure a tolerance violation of 12 CFR
1026.19(e)(3)(i) or (ii) by providing a refund to the consumer and delivering or placing in the
mail a corrected Closing Disclosure that reflects the refund no later than 60 calendar days after
consummation. (§1026.19(f)(2)(v))
C. Special Information Booklet - Section §1026.19(g)
Creditors generally must provide a copy of the “Shopping for Your Home Loan: Settlement Cost
Booklet12” (otherwise known as the special information booklet) to consumers who apply for a
consumer credit transaction secured by real property. This requirement is not limited to closed-
12
The Bureau has developed an updated version of the booklet titled “Your home loan toolkit: a step-by-step guide.” This
version is has been updated to include Dodd-Frank Act amendments and the new Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosures that are
effective August 1, 2015.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 48
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
end transactions and applies to most consumer credit transactions secured by real property,
except in a few circumstances (see below). The special information booklet is required pursuant
to Section 5 of RESPA (12 U.S.C. 2604) and is published by the CFPB to help consumers
applying for federally related mortgage loans understand real estate transactions.
(§1026.19(g)(1))
• If the consumer is applying for a HELOC subject to 12 CFR 1026.40, the creditor (or
mortgage broker) can provide a copy of the brochure entitled “When Your Home is On the
Line: What You Should Know About Home Equity Lines of Credit” instead of the special
information booklet. (§1026.19(g)(1)(ii))
• The creditor need not provide the special information booklet if the consumer is applying for
a real property-secured consumer credit transaction that does not have the purpose of
purchasing a one-to-four family residential property, such as a refinancing, a closed-end loan
secured by a subordinate lien, or a reverse mortgage. (§1026.19(g)(1)( iii))
Creditors must deliver or place in the mail the special information booklet not later than three
business days after receiving the consumer’s loan application. (§1026.19(g)(1)(i))
If the creditor denies the consumer’s application or if the consumer withdraws the application
before the end of the three-business-day period, the creditor need not provide the special
information booklet. (§1026.19(g)(1)(i); Comment 19(g)(1)(i)-3)
When two or more persons apply together for a loan, the creditor may provide a copy of the
special information booklet to just one of them. (Comment 19(g)(1)-2)
If the consumer uses a mortgage broker, the mortgage broker must provide the special
information booklet and the creditor need not do so. (§1026.19(g)(1)(i))
Creditors generally are required to use the booklets designed by the CFPB and may make only
limited changes to the special information booklet. (§1026.19(g)(2)) The CFPB may issue
revised or alternative versions of the special information booklet from time to time in the future.
Creditors should monitor the Federal Register for notice of updates. (Comment 19(g)(1)-1)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 49
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
IV. Loans receiving non-TILA-RESPA Integrated
Disclosures, Generally
Creditors making closed-end loans to consumers not subject to the TILA-RESPA Integrated
Disclosures Rule (i.e., other than loans where 12 CFR 1026.19(e) and (f) require the Loan
Estimate and the Closing Disclosure) must provide the consumer with the Truth in Lending
(TIL) disclosure, as outlined in 12 CFR 1026.17 and 1026.18. Creditors engaged in specified
housing assistance programs for low- and moderate-income consumers would also provide their
consumers with the TIL Disclosure. (§1026.3(h))
TIL Disclosure. The TIL disclosure provided for these loans includes a payment schedule.
(§1026.18(g)) The disclosed payment schedule must reflect all components of the finance
charge. It includes all payments scheduled to repay loan principal, interest on the loan, and any
other finance charge payable by the consumer after consummation of the transaction.
However, any finance charge paid separately before or at consummation (e.g., odd days’ interest)
is not part of the payment schedule. It is a prepaid finance charge that must be reflected as a
reduction in the value of the amount financed.
At the creditor’s option, the payment schedule may include amounts beyond the amount financed
and finance charge (e.g., certain insurance premiums or real estate escrow amounts such as taxes
added to payments). However, when calculating the APR, the creditor must disregard such amounts.
If the obligation is a renewable balloon payment instrument that unconditionally obligates the
financial institution to renew the short-term loan at the consumer’s option or to renew the loan
subject to conditions within the consumer’s control, the payment schedule must be disclosed
using the longer term of the renewal period or periods. The long-term loan must be disclosed
with a variable rate feature.
If there are no renewal conditions or if the financial institution guarantees to renew the obligation
in a refinancing, the payment schedule must be disclosed using the shorter balloon payment term.
The short-term loan must be disclosed as a fixed rate loan, unless it contains a variable rate
feature during the initial loan term.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 50
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
V.Variable and Adjustable Rate Transactions;
Sections 1026.18(f), 1026.20(c) and (d)
A. Closed-end transactions generally
If the terms of the legal obligation allow the financial institution, after consummation of the
transaction, to increase the APR, the financial institution must furnish the consumer with certain
information on variable rates. In addition, variable rate disclosures are not applicable to rate
increases resulting from delinquency, default, assumption, acceleration, or transfer of the collateral.
Some of the more important transaction-specific variable rate disclosure requirements follow.
• Disclosures for variable rate loans must be given for the full term of the transaction and must
be based on the terms in effect at the time of consummation.
• If the variable rate transaction includes either a seller buy-down that is reflected in a contract
or a consumer buy-down, the disclosed APR should be a composite rate based on the lower
rate for the buy-down period and the rate that is the basis for the variable rate feature for the
remainder of the term.
• If the initial rate is not determined by the index or formula used to make later interest rate
adjustments, as in a discounted variable rate transaction, the disclosed APR must reflect a
composite rate based on the initial rate for as long as it is applied and, for the remainder of
the term, the rate that would have been applied using the index or formula at the time of
consummation (i.e., the fully indexed rate).
If a loan contains a rate or payment cap that would prevent the initial rate or payment, at
o
the time of the adjustment, from changing to the fully indexed rate, the effect of that rate
or payment cap needs to be reflected in the disclosures.
The index at consummation need not be used if the contract provides a delay in the
o
implementation of changes in an index value (e.g., the contract indicates that future rate
changes are based on the index value in effect for some specified period, like 45 days
before the change date). Instead, the financial institution may use any rate from the date
of consummation back to the beginning of the specified period (e.g., during the previous
45-day period).
• If the initial interest rate is set according to the index or formula used for later adjustments,
but is set at a value as of a date before consummation, disclosures should be based on the
initial interest rate, even though the index may have changed by the consummation date.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 51
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
B. Adjustable Rate Mortgage Disclosures
1. Disclosure of Initial Rate Change for Adjustable Rate
Mortgages – Section 1026.20(d)
Creditors, assignees, or servicers13 (referred to collectively as creditors) of adjustable rate
mortgages, or ARMs, secured by the consumer’s principal dwelling and with terms of more
than one year are generally required to provide consumers with certain information pertaining
to the ARM’s initial rate change.14 This information must be provided in a disclosure that is
separate from all other documents, and the disclosure must be provided between 210 and 240
days before the first payment at the adjusted rate is due. If the first payment at a new rate is
due within the first 210 days after consummation, the creditor must provide the rate change
disclosure at consummation.
Disclosures required under this section must provide consumers with information related to the
timing and nature of the rate change. If the new rate pursuant to the change disclosed is not
known and the creditor provides an estimate, the rate must be identified as an estimate. If the
creditor is using an estimate, it must be based on the index within 15 business days prior to the
date of the disclosure. The calculation is made using the index reported in the source of
information that the creditor uses in the explanation of how the interest rate is determined.
Disclosures required under section 1026.20(d) must also include, among others:
• The date of the disclosure.
• A statement explaining that the time period that the current rate has been in effect is ending,
that the current rate is expiring, and that a change in the rate may result in a change in the
required payment; providing the effective date of the change and a schedule of any future
changes; and describing any other changes to the loan terms, features, or options taking effect
on the same date (including expiration of interest-only or payment-option features).
• A table containing the current and new interest rates, the current and new payments,
including the date the new payment is due, and for interest-only or negative amortization
loans, the amount of the current and new payment allocated to principal, interest, and escrow
(if applicable).
NOTE: The new payment allocation disclosed is the expected payment allocation for the first
payment for which the new interest rate will apply.
13
Creditors, assignees, and servicers are all subject to the requirements of this section 1026.20(d). Creditors, assignees, and
servicers may decide among themselves which of them will provide the required disclosures. However, establishing a business
relationship where one party agrees to provide disclosures on behalf of the other parties does not absolve all other parties from
their legal obligations.
14
Exemptions to disclosure requirements are covered in the section titled, “Exemptions to the Adjustable Rate Mortgage
Disclosure Requirements – Sections 1026.20(c)(1)(ii) and (d)(1)(ii)” below.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 52
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• An explanation of how the interest rate is determined, including (among other things) an
explanation of the index or formula used to determine the new rate and the margin.
• Any limitations on the interest rate or payment increase for each scheduled increase and over
the life of the loan. Creditors must also include a statement regarding the extent to which
such limitations result in foregone interest rate increases and the earliest date such foregone
interest rate increases may apply to future interest rate adjustments.
• An explanation of how the new payment is determined, including an explanation of the index
or formula used to determine the new rate, including the margin, the expected loan balance
on the date of the rate adjustment, and the remaining loan term or any changes to the term
caused by the rate change.
• If the creditor is using an estimated rate or payment, a statement that the actual new interest
rate and new payment will be provided to the consumer between two and four months prior
to the first payment at the new rate.
• For negative amortization loans, creditors must provide a statement indicating that the new
payment will not be allocated to pay loan principal and will not reduce the balance of the
loan; instead, the payment will only apply to part of the interest, thereby increasing the
amount of principal.
• A statement indicating the circumstances under which any prepayment penalty may be
imposed, the time period during which it may be imposed, and a statement that the consumer
may contact the servicer for additional information, including the maximum amount of the
penalty that may be charged to the consumer.
• The telephone number of the creditor, assignee, or servicer for use if the consumer
anticipates that he or she may not be able to make the new payments.
• A statement providing specified alternatives (which include refinancing, selling the property,
loan modification, and forbearance) available if the consumer anticipates not being able to
make the new payment.
• A website address for either the CFPB’s or the Department of Housing and Urban
Development’s (HUD) list of homeownership counselors and counseling organizations, the
HUD toll-free telephone number to access the HUD list of homeownership counselors and
counseling organizations, and the CFPB’s website address for state housing finance
authorities contact information.
• For more information pertaining to the required format of the disclosures required under
section 1026.20(d), please see section 1026.20(d)(3) and the model and sample forms H-
4(D)(3) and (4) in Appendix H.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 53
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
2. Disclosure of Rate Adjustments Resulting in Payment
Changes – Section 1026.20(c)
Creditors, assignees, or servicers15 (referred to collectively as creditors) of ARMs secured by a
consumer’s principal dwelling with a term greater than one year are generally required to provide
consumers with disclosures prior to the adjustment of the interest rate on the mortgage,16 if the
interest rate change will result in a payment change as follows:
• For ARMs where the payment changes along with a rate change, disclosures must be
provided to consumers between 60 and 120 days before the first payment at the new amount
is due.
• For ARMs where the payment changes in connection with a uniformly scheduled interest rate
adjustment occurring every 60 days (or more frequently), the disclosures must be provided
between 25 and 120 days before the first payment at the new amount is due.
• For ARMs originated prior to January 10, 2015, in which the contract requires the adjusted
interest and payment to be calculated based on an index that is available on a date less than
45 days prior to the adjustment date, disclosures must be provided between 25 and 120 days
before the first payment at the new amount is required.
• For ARMs where the first adjustment occurs within 60 days of consummation and the new
interest rate disclosed at the time was an estimate, the disclosures must be provided as soon
as practicable, but no less than 25 days before the first payment at the new amount is due.
Disclosures required under section 1026.20(c) must contain specific information, which includes,
among others:
• A statement explaining that the time period during which the consumer’s current rate has
been in effect is ending and that the rate and payment will change; when the interest rate will
change; dates when additional interest rate adjustments are scheduled to occur; and any other
change in loan terms or features that take effect on the same date that the interest rate and
payment change, such as an expiration of interest-only treatment or payment-option feature.
• A table explaining the current and new interest rates; the current and new payments,
including the date the new payment is due; and for interest-only or negative amortizing loans,
the amount of the current and new payment allocated to principal, interest, and amounts for
escrow (if applicable).
15
Creditors, assignees, and servicers are all subject to the requirements of section 1026.20(c). Creditors, assignees, and servicers
may decide among themselves which of them will provide the required disclosures. However, establishing a business relationship
where one party agrees to provide disclosures on behalf of the other parties does not absolve all other parties from their legal
obligations.
16
Exemptions to disclosure requirements are covered in the section titled, “Exemptions to the Adjustable Rate Mortgage
Disclosure Requirements – Sections 1026.20(c)(1)(ii) and (d)(1)(ii)” below.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 54
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• An explanation of how the new interest rate is determined, including (among other things)
the index or formula used to determine the new rate and the margin, and any application of
previously foregone interest rate increases from past adjustments;
• Any limitations on the interest rate and payment increase for each scheduled increase for the
duration of the loan. Creditors must also include a statement regarding the extent to which
such limitations result in foregone interest rate increases and the earliest date such foregone
interest rate increases may apply to future interest rate adjustments.
• An explanation of how the new payment is determined, including an explanation of the index
or formula used to determine the new rate, including the margin, the expected loan balance
on the date of the rate adjustment, and the remaining loan term or any changes to the term
caused by the rate change;
• For negative amortization loans, creditors must provide a statement indicating that the new
payment will not reduce the balance of the loan, rather, the payment will only apply to part of
the interest, thereby increasing the amount of principal; and
• A statement indicating the circumstances under which any prepayment penalty may be
imposed, the time period during which it may be imposed, and a statement that the consumer
may contact the servicer for additional information, including the maximum amount of the
penalty that may be charged to the consumer.
For more information pertaining to the required format of the disclosures required under section
1026.20(c), please see section 1026.20(c)(3) and the model and sample forms H-4(D)(1) and (2)
in Appendix H.
3. Exemptions to the Adjustable Rate Mortgage Disclosure
Requirements – Sections 1026.20(c)(1)(ii) and (d)(1)(ii)
Disclosures under sections 1026.20(c) and (d) are not required for ARMs with a term of one year
or less. Likewise, disclosures under section 1026.20(c) are not required if the first interest rate and
payment adjustment occurs within the first 210 days and the new rate disclosed at consummation
pursuant to section 1026.20(d) was not an estimate. ARM disclosures for payment changes are
exempt under section 1026.20(c)(1)(ii)(C) where the servicer is a debt collector under the Fair
Debt Collection Practices Act (FDCPA) and a consumer has exercised the right under FDCPA
section 805(c) to prohibit debt collector communications regarding the debt.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 55
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Closed-End Credit: Finance Charge Accuracy Tolerances
Is this a
closed-end
credit
Yes TILA No
claim
asserting
rescission
rights?
Finance charge Is the Did the
tolerance is rescission Is the transaction No
$35. Yes claim a transaction Yes originate before
An overstated defense to secured by 9/30/95?
finance charge foreclosure real estate or
is not action? dwelling?
considered a
violation. No Yes
No
Finance charge
Is the tolerance is $200
No transaction a for
refinancing? understatements.
An overstated
finance charge is
not considered a
violation.
Yes
Finance charge
tolerance is
one-half of 1% Is the Finance charge
am o o f u n th t e o l r o $ a 1 n 0 0, Yes tra h n ig sa h c -c ti o o s n t a to $ le 1 r 0 a 0 n c fo e r i s
whichever is mortgage understatements.
greater. loan?* An overstated
An overstated finance charge
finance charge is is not
not considered a No considered a
violation. violation.
Does the
refinancing
Yes
involve a The finance charge shall
consolidation or be considered accurate
new advance? if it is not more than $5
above or below the
exact finance charge in
a transaction involving
No an amount financed of
$1,000 or less, or not
more than $10 above or
Finance charge tolerance is 1% below the exact finance
of the loan amount or $100, charge in a transaction
whichever is greater. involving an amount
financed of more than
$1,000.
* See 15 U.S.C. 1602(bb)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 56
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Closed-End Credit: Accuracy and Reimbursement Tolerances for
UNDERSTATED FINANCE CHARGES
Is the loan secured by real estate or a
dwelling?
No Yes
Is the amount financed greater
than $1,000?
Is the disclosed FC understated
No Yes by more than $100 (or $200 if
the loan originated before
9/30/95)?
Is the disclosed FC Is the disclosed FC
understated by more than understated by more than
$5? $10?
No Yes
Ye No No Yes
No violation FC Violation
FC violation No violation FC violation
Is the loan
term greater
than 10
years?
No Yes
Is the loan a
regular loan?
No Yes
Is the disclosed FC plus the FC Is the disclosed FC plus the FC
reimbursement tolerance (based reimbursement tolerance (based
on a one-quarter of 1 percentage on a one-eighth of 1 percentage
point APR tolerance) less than point APR toler ance) less than
the correct FC? the correct FC?
Ye No No Yes
No reimbursement
Subject to
reimbursement
CFPB April 2015 TILA 57
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Closed-End Credit: Accuracy Tolerances for
OVERSTATED FINANCE CHARGES
Is the loan secured by real estate or a
dwelling?
No Yes
Is the amount financed greater
than $1,000?
No violation
No Yes
Is the disclosed FC less Is the disclosed FC less
$5 greater than the $10 greater than the
correct FC? correct FC?
No Yes No Yes
No FC violation No violation FC violation
violation
CFPB April 2015 TILA 58
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Closed-End Credit: Accuracy Tolerances for
OVERSTATED APRs
Is this a “regular” loan?
No Yes
Is the disclosed APR greater than the correct Is the disclosed APR greater than the correct
APR by more than one-quarter of one APR by more than one-eighth of one percentage
percentage point? point?
Yes No No Yes
No violation
Is the loan secured by real estate or a dwelling?
No Yes
Is the finance charge disclosed greater than
APR Violation the correct finance charge?
Yes No
APR Violation
Was the finance charge disclosure error the cause
of the APR disclosure error?
No Yes
APR Violation No violation
CFPB April 2015 TILA 59
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Closed-End Credit: Accuracy and Reimbursement Tolerances for
UNDERSTATED APRs
Is the loan a “regular” loan?
No Yes
Is the disclosed APR understated by Is the disclosed APR understated by
more than one-quarter of one percentage more than one-eighth of one
point? percentage point?
Ye No No Yes
No violation
Is the loan secured by real estate or a dwelling?
No Ye
Is the finance charge understated by more than:
• $100 if the loan originated on or after 9/30/95?
• $200 if the loan originated before 9/30/95?
APR violation No Yes
Was the finance charge disclosure error the cause of
the APR disclosure error?
APR violation
No Yes
APR violation No violation
Is the loan term greater than 10 years?
No Yes
Is the loan a “regular” loan?
No Ye
Is the disclosed APR understated by Is the disclosed APR understated by
more than one-quarter of one percentage more than one-eighth of one percentage
point? point?
Yes No No Yes
No reimbursement
Subject to reimbursement
CFPB April 2015 TILA 60
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
VI. Refinancings – Section 1026.20(a)
When an obligation is satisfied and replaced by a new obligation to the original financial
institution (or a holder or servicer of the original obligation) and is undertaken by the same
consumer, it must be treated as a refinancing for which a complete set of new disclosures must
be furnished. A refinancing may involve the consolidation of several existing obligations,
disbursement of new money to the consumer, or the rescheduling of payments under an existing
obligation. In any form, the new obligation must completely replace the earlier one to be
considered a refinancing under the regulation. The finance charge on the new disclosure must
include any unearned portion of the old finance charge that is not credited to the existing
obligation. (§1026.20(a))
The following transactions are not considered refinancings even if the existing obligation is
satisfied and replaced by a new obligation undertaken by the same consumer:
• A renewal of an obligation with a single payment of principal and interest or with periodic
interest payments and a final payment of principal with no change in the original terms.
• An APR reduction with a corresponding change in the payment schedule.
• An agreement involving a court proceeding.
• Changes in credit terms arising from the consumer’s default or delinquency.
• The renewal of optional insurance purchased by the consumer and added to an existing
transaction, if required disclosures were provided for the initial purchase of the insurance.
However, even if it is not accomplished by the cancellation of the old obligation and substitution
of a new one, a new transaction subject to new disclosures results if the financial institution:
• Increases the rate based on a variable rate feature that was not previously disclosed; or
• Adds a variable rate feature to the obligation.
If, at the time a loan is renewed, the rate is increased, the increase is not considered a variable
rate feature. It is the cost of renewal, similar to a flat fee, as long as the new rate remains fixed
during the remaining life of the loan. If the original debt is not canceled in connection with
such a renewal, the regulation does not require new disclosures. Also, changing the index of a
variable rate transaction to a comparable index is not considered adding a variable rate feature
to the obligation.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 61
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
VII. Escrow Cancellation Disclosures – Section
1026.20(e)
Escrow Closing Notice. Before cancelling an escrow account, an Escrow Closing Notice must be
provided to any consumers for whom an escrow account was established in connection with a
closed-end consumer credit transaction secured by a first lien on real property or a dwelling,
except for reverse mortgages. (§1026.20(e)(1)) For this purpose, the term escrow account has the
same meaning given to it as under Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.17(b), and the term servicer has
the same meaning given to it as under Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.2(b). There are two
exceptions to the requirement to provide the notice:
• Creditors and servicers are not required to provide the notice if the escrow account that is
being cancelled was established solely in connection with the consumer’s delinquency or
default on the underlying debt obligation. (Comment 20(e)(1)-2)
• Creditors and servicers are not required to provide the notice when the underlying debt
obligation for which an escrow account was established is terminated, including by
repayment, refinancing, rescission, and foreclosure. (Comment 20(e)(1)-3)
For loans subject to the Escrow Closing Notice requirement, if the creditor or servicer cancels
the escrow account at the consumer’s request, the creditor or servicer must ensure that the
consumers receive the notice no later than three business days (i.e., all calendar days except
Sundays and the legal public holidays (see §§1026.2(a)(6), 1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A) and (f)(1)(iii))
before the consumer’s escrow account is canceled. (§1026.20(e)(5)(i)) If the creditor or servicer
cancels the escrow account and the cancellation is not at the consumer’s request, the creditor or
servicer must ensure that the consumer receives the notice no later than 30 business days before
the closure of the consumer's escrow account. (§1026.20(e)(5)(ii) If the Escrow Closing Notice is
not provided to the consumer in person, the consumer is considered to have received the notice
three business days after it is delivered or placed in the mail. (§1026.20(e)(5)(iii)
The creditor or servicer must disclose (§1026.20(e)(1)-(2)):
• The date on which the account will be closed;
• That an escrow account may also be called an impound or trust account;
• The reason why the escrow account will be closed;
• That without an escrow account, the consumer must pay all property costs, such as taxes and
homeowner’s insurance, directly, possibly in one or two large payments a year;
• A table, titled “Cost to you,” that contains an itemization of the amount of any fee the
creditor or servicer imposes on the consumer in connection with the closure of the
consumer’s escrow account, labeled “Escrow Closing Fee,” and a statement that the fee is for
closing the escrow account;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 62
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Under the reference “In the future”:
The consequences if the consumer fails to pay property costs, including the actions that a
o
state or local government may take if property taxes are not paid and the actions the
creditor or servicer may take if the consumer does not pay some or all property costs,
such as adding amounts to the loan balance, adding an escrow account to the loan, or
purchasing a property insurance policy on the consumer’s behalf that may be more
expensive and provide fewer benefits than a policy that the consumer could obtain
directly;
A telephone number that the consumer can use to request additional information about
o
the cancellation of the escrow account;
Whether the creditor or servicer offers the option of keeping the escrow account open
o
and, as applicable, a telephone number the consumer can use to request that the account
be kept open; and
Whether there is a cut-off date by which the consumer can request that the account be
o
kept open.
The creditor or servicer may also, at its option, disclose (§1026.20(e)(3)):
• The creditor or servicer’s name or logo;
• The consumer’s name, phone number, mailing address, and property address;
• The issue date of the notice;
• The loan number; or
• The consumer’s account number.
In addition, the disclosures must:
• Contain a required heading that is more conspicuous than and precedes the required
disclosures discussed above. (§1026.20(e)(4))
• Be clear and conspicuous. This standard generally requires that the disclosures in the Escrow
Closing Notice be in a reasonably understandable form and readily noticeable to the
consumer. (Comment 20(e)(2)-1)
• Be written in 10-point font, at a minimum. (§1026.20(e)(4))
• Be grouped together on the front side of a one-page document. The disclosures must be
separate from all other materials, with the headings, content, order, and format substantially
similar to model form H-29 in appendix H to Regulation Z. (§1026.20(e)(4))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 63
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
VIII. Closed-end Advertising – Section 1026.24
If an advertisement for credit states specific credit terms, it must state only those terms that
actually are or will be arranged or offered by the creditor.
Disclosures required by this section must be made “clearly and conspicuously.” To meet this
standard in general, credit terms need not be printed in a certain type size nor appear in any
particular place in the advertisement. For advertisements for credit secured by a dwelling, a
clear and conspicuous disclosure means that the required information is disclosed with equal
prominence and in close proximity to the advertised rates or payments triggering the required
disclosures.
If an advertisement states a rate of finance charge, it must state the rate as an “annual percentage
rate,” using that term. If the APR may be increased after consummation, the advertisement must
state that fact.
If an advertisement is for credit not secured by a dwelling, the advertisement must not state any
other rate, except that a simple annual rate or periodic rate that is applied to an unpaid balance
may be stated in conjunction with, but not more conspicuously than, the APR.
If an advertisement is for credit secured by a dwelling, the advertisement must not state any other
rate, except that a simple annual rate that is applied to an unpaid balance may be stated in
conjunction with, but not more conspicuously than, the APR. That is, an advertisement for credit
secured by a dwelling may not state a periodic rate, other than a simple annual rate, that is
applied to an unpaid balance.
“Triggering terms” – The following are triggering terms that require additional disclosures:
• The amount or percentage of any down payment;
• The number of payments or period of repayment;
• The amount of any payment; and
• The amount of any finance charge.
An advertisement stating a triggering term must also state the following terms as applicable:
• The amount or percentage of any down payment;
• The terms of repayment, which reflect the repayment obligations over the full term of the
loan, including any balloon payment; and
• The “annual percentage rate,” using that term, and, if the rate may be increased after
consummation, that fact.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 64
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
For any advertisement secured by a dwelling, other than television or radio advertisements, that
states a simple annual rate of interest and more than one simple annual rate of interest will apply
over the term of the advertised loan, the advertisement must state in a clear and conspicuous
manner:
• Each simple rate of interest that will apply. In variable-rate transactions, a rate determined by
adding an index and margin must be disclosed based on a reasonably current index and
margin.
• The period of time during which each simple annual rate of interest will apply.
• The APR for the loan.
The regulation prohibits the following seven deceptive or misleading acts or practices in
advertisements for closed-end mortgage loans:
• Stating that rates or payments for loans are “fixed” when those rates or payments can vary
without adequately disclosing that the interest rate or payment amounts are “fixed” only for a
limited period of time, rather than for the full term of the loan;
• Making comparisons between actual or hypothetical credit payments or rates and any
payment or rate available under the advertised product that are not available for the full term
of the loan, with certain exceptions for advertisements for variable rate products;
• Characterizing the products offered as “government loan programs,” “government-supported
loans,” or otherwise endorsed or sponsored by a federal or state government entity even
though the advertised products are not government-supported or -sponsored loans;
• Displaying the name of the consumer’s current mortgage lender, unless the advertisement
also prominently discloses that the advertisement is from a mortgage lender not affiliated
with the consumer’s current lender;
• Making claims of debt elimination if the product advertised would merely replace one debt
obligation with another;
• Creating a false impression that the mortgage broker or lender is a “counselor” for the
consumer; and
• In foreign-language advertisements, providing certain information, such as a low
introductory “teaser” rate, in a foreign language, while providing required disclosures only in
English.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 65
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Subpart D – Miscellaneous
Subpart D contains rules on oral disclosures (§1026.26), disclosures in languages other than
English (§1026.27), record retention (§1026.25), effect on state laws (§1026.28), state
exemptions (§1026.29), and rate limitations (§1026.30).
Record Retention – Section 1026.25
As a general rule, the creditor must retain evidence of compliance with Regulation Z (other than
advertising requirements under §§1026.16 and 1026.24, and other than certain requirements for
mortgage loans) for two years after the date disclosures are required to be made or action is
required to be taken. (§1026.25(a)) This includes, for example, evidence that the creditor
properly handled adverse credit reports in connection with amounts subject to a billing dispute
under 12 CFR 1026.13, and properly handled the refunding of credit balances under 12 CFR
1026.11 and 1026.21. The creditor may retain the evidence by any method that reproduces
records accurately (including computer programs) (Comment 25(a)-2). A creditor must permit
the enforcing agency to inspect its relevant records for compliance. (§1026.25(b))
The record retention period for mortgage loans is generally three years. (§1026.25(c)) A creditor
must retain evidence of compliance with the requirements of 12 CFR 1026.19(e) and (f) for three
years after the later of the date of consummation, the date disclosures are required to be made, or
the date the action is required to be taken. (§1026.25(c)(1)(i))
For Closing Disclosures, the record retention period is five years. The creditor must retain
completed closing disclosures required by 12 CFR 1026.19(f)(1)(i) or (f)(4)(i), and all
documents related to such disclosures, for five years after consummation. (§1026.25(c)(1)(ii)(A))
If a creditor sells, transfers, or otherwise disposes of its interest in a mortgage loan subject to 12
CFR 1026.19(f) and does not service the mortgage loan, the creditor must provide a copy of the
closing disclosures to the owner or servicer of the mortgage, and the new owner or servicer must
retain such disclosures for the remainder of the five-year period.
For loan originator compensation, creditors and loan originator organizations must retain
records-related requirements for mortgage loan originator compensation and the compensation
agreement that governs those payments for three years after the date of payment.
(§1026.25(c)(2))
A creditor must retain evidence to show compliance with the minimum standards for loans
secured by a dwelling in 12 CFR 1026.43 for three years after consummation of a transaction
covered by that section. (§1026.25(c)(3))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 66
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Relationship to State Law – TILA 111 and Sections
1026.28, .29
State laws providing rights, responsibilities, or procedures for consumers or financial institutions
for consumer credit contracts may be:
• Preempted by federal law;
• Not preempted by federal law; or
• Substituted in lieu of the TILA and Regulation Z requirements.
State law provisions are preempted to the extent that they contradict the requirements in the
following chapters of the TILA and the implementing sections of Regulation Z:
• Chapter 1, “General Provisions,” which contains definitions and acceptable methods for
determining finance charges and annual percentage rates.
• Chapter 2, “Credit Transactions,” which contains disclosure requirements, rescission rights,
and certain credit card provisions.
• Chapter 3, “Credit Advertising,” which contains consumer credit advertising rules and APR
oral disclosure requirements.
For example, a state law would be preempted if it required a bank to use the terms “nominal
annual interest rate” in lieu of “annual percentage rate.”
Conversely, state law provisions are generally not preempted under federal law if they call for,
without contradicting chapters 1, 2, or 3 of the TILA or the implementing sections of Regulation
Z, either of the following:
• Disclosure of information not otherwise required. A state law that requires disclosure of the
minimum periodic payment for open-end credit, for example, would not be preempted
because it does not contradict federal law.
• Disclosures more detailed than those required. A state law that requires itemization of the
amount financed, for example, would not be preempted, unless it contradicts federal law by
requiring the itemization to appear with the disclosure of the amount financed in the
segregated closed-end credit disclosures.
The relationship between state law and chapter 4 of the TILA (“Credit Billing”) involves two
parts. The first part is concerned with sections 161 (correction of billing errors) and 162
(regulation of credit reports) of the act; the second part addresses the remaining sections of
chapter 4.
State law provisions are preempted if they differ from the rights, responsibilities, or procedures
contained in sections 161 or 162. An exception is made, however, for state law that allows a
CFPB April 2015 TILA 67
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
consumer to inquire about an account and requires the bank to respond to such inquiry beyond
the time limits provided by federal law. Such a state law would not be preempted for the extra
time period.
State law provisions are preempted if they result in violations of sections 163 through 171 of
chapter 4. For example, a state law that allows the card issuer to offset the consumer’s credit-
card indebtedness against funds held by the card issuer would be preempted, since it would
violate 12 CFR 1026.12(d). Conversely, a state law that requires periodic statements to be sent
more than 14 days before the end of a free-ride period would not be preempted, since no
violation of federal law is involved.
A bank, state, or other interested party may ask the CFPB to determine whether state law
contradicts chapters 1 through 3 of the TILA or Regulation Z. They also may ask if the state law is
different from, or would result in violations of, chapter 4 of the TILA and the implementing
provisions of Regulation Z. If the CFPB determines that a disclosure required by state law (other
than a requirement relating to the finance charge, APR, or the disclosures required under section
1026.32) is substantially the same in meaning as a disclosure required under the act or Regulation
Z, generally creditors in that state may make the state disclosure in lieu of the federal disclosure.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 68
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Subpart E – Special Rules for Certain Home
Mortgage Transactions
Subpart E contains special rules for mortgage transactions. Section 1026.32 requires certain
disclosures and provides limitations for closed-end credit transactions and open-end credit plans
that have rates or fees above specified amounts or certain prepayment penalties. Section 1026.33
requires special disclosures, including the total annual loan cost rate, for reverse mortgage
transactions. Section 1026.34 prohibits specific acts and practices in connection with high-cost
mortgages, as defined in 12 CFR 1026.32(a). Section 1026.35 provides requirements for higher-
priced mortgage loans. Section 1026.36 prohibits specific acts and practices in connection with
an extension of credit secured by a dwelling. Sections 1026.37 and 1026.38 set forth disclosure
requirements for most closed-end transactions secured by real property, as required by 12 CFR
1026.19(e) and (f).
General Rules – Section 1026.31
The requirements and limitations of this subpart are in addition to, and not in lieu of, those
contained in other subparts of Regulation Z. The disclosures for high-cost, reverse mortgage, and
higher-priced mortgage transactions must be made clearly and conspicuously in writing, in a
form that the consumer may keep and in compliance with specific timing requirements.
Requirements for High-Cost Mortgages – Section 1026.32
The requirements of this section generally apply to a high-cost mortgage, which is a consumer
credit transaction secured by the consumer’s principal dwelling (subject to the exemptions
discussed below) that meets any one of the following three coverage tests.
• The APR will exceed the average prime offer rate (APOR), as defined in section
1026.35(a)(2), applicable for a comparable transaction as of the date the interest rate is set by:
More than 6.5 percentage points for first-lien transactions (other than as described below);
o
More than 8.5 percentage points for first-lien transactions where the dwelling is personal
o
property and the loan amount is less than $50,000; or
More than 8.5 percentage points for subordinate-lien transactions.
o
• The total points and fees (see definition below) for the transaction will exceed:
For transactions with a loan amount of $20,000 or more, five percent of the total loan
o
amount; or
For transactions with a loan amount of less than $20,000, the lesser of eight percent of the
o
total transaction amount or $1,000 for the calendar year 2014.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 69
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
The $20,000 and $1,000 dollar amounts will be adjusted annually based on changes in the
Consumer Price Index and will be reflected in official interpretations of section 1026.32(a)(1)(ii).
The official interpretation of section 1026.32(a)(1)(ii) also contains a historical list of dollar
amount adjustments for transactions originated prior to January 10, 2014.
NOTE: The “total loan amount” (using the face amount of the note) for closed-end credit is
calculated by taking the amount financed (see §1026.18(b)) and deducting any cost listed in
sections 1026.32(b)(1)(iii), (iv), or (vi) that is both included in points and fees and financed by
the creditor. The “total loan amount” for open-end credit is the credit plan limit when the account
is opened.
• The terms of the loan contract or open-end credit agreement permit the creditor to charge a
prepayment penalty (see definition below) more than 36 months after consummation or
account opening, or prepayment penalties that exceed more than two percent of the amount
prepaid (§1026.32(a)(1)(iii)).
NOTE: Section 1026.32(d)(6) prohibits prepayment penalties for high-cost mortgages. However,
if a mortgage loan has a prepayment penalty that may be imposed more than 36 months after
consummation or account opening or that is greater than two percent of the amount prepaid, the
loan is a high-cost mortgage regardless of interest rate or fees. Therefore, the prepayment penalty
coverage test above effectively bans transactions of the types subject to HOEPA coverage that
permit creditors to charge prepayment penalties that exceed the prescribed limits.
Exemptions from HOEPA Coverage – Section 1026.32(a)(2)
• Reverse mortgage transactions subject to section 1026.33;
• A transaction that finances the initial construction of a dwelling;
• A transaction originated by a Housing Finance Agency, where the Housing Finance Agency
is the creditor for the transaction; or
• A transaction originated pursuant to the United States Department of Agriculture’s Rural
Development Section 502 Direct Loan Program.
Determination of APR for High-Cost Mortgages – Section 1026.32(a)(3)
The APR used to determine whether a mortgage is a high-cost mortgage is calculated differently
than the APR that is used on TILA disclosures. Specifically, the APR for HOEPA coverage is
based on the following:
• If the APR will not vary during the length of the loan or credit plan (i.e., for fixed-rate
transactions), the interest rate in effect as of the date the interest rate for the transaction is set
(§1026.32(a)(3)(i));
• If the interest rate may vary during the term of the loan or credit plan in accordance with an
index, the interest rate that results from adding the maximum margin permitted at any time
CFPB April 2015 TILA 70
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
during the term of the loan or credit plan to the index rate in effect as of the date the interest
rate for the transaction is set, or to the introductory interest rate, whichever is greater
(§1026.32(a)(3)(ii)); or
• If the interest rate may or will vary during the term of the loan or credit plan other than as
described above (i.e., as in a step-rate transaction), the maximum interest rate that may be
imposed during the life of the loan or credit plan. (§1026.32(a)(3)(iii))
Points and Fees for High-Cost Mortgages – Section 1026.32(b)
NOTE: Points and fees calculations for high-cost mortgages depend upon whether the
transaction is closed end or open end.
For a closed-end transaction, calculate the points and fees by including the following charges
(§1026.32(b)(1)):
• All items included in the finance charge under sections 1026.4(a) and (b), except that the
following items are excluded:
Interest or the time-price differential;
o
Any premiums or other charges imposed in connection with a federal or state agency
o
program for any guaranty or insurance that protects the creditor against the consumer’s
default or other credit loss (i.e., up-front and annual FHA premiums, VA funding fees,
and USDA guarantee fees);
Premiums or other charges for any guaranty or insurance that protects creditors against
o
the consumer’s default or other credit loss and IS NOT in connection with a federal or
state agency program (i.e., private mortgage insurance (PMI) premiums) as follows:
 The entire amount of any premiums or other charges payable after consummation
(i.e., monthly or annual PMI premiums); or
 If the premium or other charge is payable at or before consummation, the portion of
any such premium or other charge that is not in excess of the permissible up-front
mortgage insurance premium for FHA loans, but only if the premium or charge is
refundable on a pro rata basis and the refund is automatically issued upon the
notification of the satisfaction of the underlying mortgage loan. The permissible up-
front mortgage insurance premiums for FHA loans are published in HUD Mortgagee
Letters, available online at:
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/administration/hudclips/l
etters/mortgagee.
Bona fide third-party charges not retained by the creditor, loan originator, or an affiliate
o
of either, unless the charge is required to be included under section 1026.32(b)(1)(i)(C),
(iii), or (v);
CFPB April 2015 TILA 71
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Up to two bona fide discount points payable by the consumer in connection with the
o
transaction, provided that the interest rate without any discount does not exceed:
 The APOR for a comparable transaction by more than one percentage point; or
 If the transaction is secured by personal property, the average rate for a loan insured
under Title I of the National Housing Act by more than one percentage point, or
If no discount points have been excluded above, then up to one bona fide discount point
o
payable by the consumer in connection with the transaction, provided that the interest rate
without any discount does not exceed:
 The APOR for a comparable transaction by more than two percentage points; or
 If the transaction is secured by personal property, the average rate for a loan insured
under Title I of the National Housing Act by more than two percentage points.
NOTE: In the case of a closed-end plan, a bona fide discount point means an amount equal to
one percent of the loan amount paid by the consumer that reduces the interest rate or time-
price differential applicable to the transaction based on a calculation that is consistent with
established industry practices for determining the amount of reduction in the interest rate or
time-price differential appropriate for the amount of discount points paid by the consumer.
(§1026.32(b)(3))
• All compensation paid directly or indirectly by a consumer or creditor to a loan originator (as
defined in section 1026.36(a)(1) that can be attributed to the transaction at the time the
interest rate is set unless:
That compensation is paid by a consumer to a mortgage broker, as defined in section
o
1026.36(a)(2), and already has been included in points and fees under section
1026.32(b)(1)(i);
That compensation is paid by a mortgage broker, as defined in section 1026.36(a)(2), to a
o
loan originator that is an employee of the mortgage broker;
That compensation is paid by a creditor to a loan originator that is an employee of the
o
creditor; or
• All items listed in section 1026.4(c)(7), other than amounts held for future taxes, unless ALL
of the following conditions are met:
The charge is reasonable;
o
The creditor receives no direct or indirect compensation in connection with the charge;
o
and
The charge is not paid to an affiliate of the creditor.
o
CFPB April 2015 TILA 72
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Premiums or other charges paid at or before consummation, whether paid in cash or financed,
for any credit life, credit disability, credit unemployment, or credit property insurance, or for
any other life, accident, health, or loss-of-income insurance for which the creditor is a
beneficiary, or any payments directly or indirectly for any debt cancellation or suspension
agreement or contract.
• The maximum prepayment penalty that may be charged or collected under the terms of the
mortgage or credit plan; and
• The total prepayment penalty incurred by the consumer if the consumer refinances an
existing mortgage loan, or terminates an existing open-end credit plan in connection with
obtaining a new mortgage loan, with a new mortgage transaction extended by the current
holder of the existing loan, a servicer acting on behalf of the current holder, or an affiliate of
either.
For an open-end credit plan, points and fees mean the following charges that are known at or
before account opening: (§1026.32(b)(2))
• All items included in the finance charge under sections 1026.4(a) and (b), except that the
following items are excluded:
Interest or the time-price differential;
o
Any premiums or other charges imposed in connection with a federal or state agency
o
program for any guaranty or insurance that protects the creditor against the consumer’s
default or other credit loss (i.e., up-front and annual FHA premiums, VA funding fees,
and USDA guarantee fees);
Premiums or other charges for any for guaranty or insurance that protects creditors
o
against the consumer’s default or other credit loss and IS NOT in connection with a
federal or state agency program (i.e., private mortgage insurance (PMI) premiums) as
follows:
 If the premium or other charge is payable after account opening, the entire amount of
such premium or other charge, or
 If the premium or other charge is payable at or before account opening, the portion of
any such premium or other charge that is not in excess of the permissible up-front
mortgage insurance premium for FHA loans, but only if the premium or charge is
refundable on a pro rata basis and the refund is automatically issued upon the
notification of the satisfaction of the underlying mortgage loan. The permissible up-
front mortgage insurance premiums for FHA loans are published in HUD Mortgagee
Letters, available online at:
http://portal.hud.gov/hudportal/HUD?src=/program_offices/administration/hudclips/l
etters/mortgagee
CFPB April 2015 TILA 73
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Bona fide third-party charges not retained by the creditor, loan originator, or an affiliate
o
of either, unless the charge is required to be included under section 1026.32(b)(2)(i)(C),
(iii), or (iv);
Up to two bona fide discount points payable by the consumer in connection with the
o
transaction, provided that the interest rate without any discount does not exceed:
 The APOR by more than one percentage point; or
 If the transaction is secured by personal property, the average rate for a loan insured
under Title I of the National Housing Act by more than one percentage point, or
If no discount points have been excluded above, then up to one bona fide discount point
o
payable by the consumer in connection with the transaction, provided that the interest rate
without any discount does not exceed:
 The APOR by more than two percentage points; or
 If the transaction is secured by personal property, the average rate for a loan insured
under Title I of the National Housing Act by more than two percentage points.
NOTE: A bona fide discount point means an amount equal to one percent of the credit
limit when the account is opened, paid by the consumer, that reduces the interest rate or
time-price differential applicable to the transaction based on a calculation that is
consistent with established industry practices for determining the amount of reduction in
the interest rate or time-price differential appropriate for the amount of discount points
paid by the consumer. (§1026.32(b)(3)(ii))
• All compensation paid directly or indirectly by a consumer or creditor to a loan originator (as
defined in section 1026.36(a)(1) that can be attributed to the transaction at the time the
interest rate is set unless:
That compensation is paid by a consumer to a mortgage broker, as defined in section
o
1026.36(a)(2) and already has been included in points and fees under section
1026.33(b)(2)(i);
That compensation is paid by a mortgage broker as defined in section 1026.36(a)(2) to a
o
loan originator that is an employee of the mortgage broker; or
That compensation is paid by a creditor to a loan originator that is an employee of the
o
creditor, or
That compensation is paid by a retailer of manufactured homes to its employee.
o
NOTE: A person is not a loan originator if the person does not take a consumer credit application
or offer or negotiate credit terms available from a creditor to that consumer based on the
consumer’s financial characteristics, but the person performs purely administrative or clerical tasks
on behalf of a person who does engage in such activities. An employee of a manufactured home
CFPB April 2015 TILA 74
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
retailer who does not take a consumer credit application, offer or negotiate credit terms, or advise a
consumer on credit terms is not a loan originator. For purposes of section 1026.36(a), “credit
terms” include rates, fees or other costs, and a consumer’s financial characteristics include any
factors that may influence a credit decision, such as debts, income, assets or credit history.
• All items listed in section 1026.4(c)(7), other than amounts held for future taxes, unless ALL
of the following conditions are met:
The charge is reasonable;
o
The creditor receives no direct or indirect compensation in connection with the charge;
o
and
The charge is not paid to an affiliate of the creditor.
o
• Premiums or other charges paid at or before account opening for any credit life, credit
disability, credit unemployment, or credit property insurance, or for any other life, accident,
health, or loss-of-income insurance for which the creditor is a beneficiary, or any payments
directly or indirectly for any debt cancellation or suspension agreement or contract.
• The maximum prepayment penalty that may be charged or collected under the terms of the
credit plan; and
• The total prepayment penalty incurred by the consumer if the consumer refinances an
existing closed-end credit transaction with an open-end credit plan, or terminates an existing
open-end credit plan in connection with obtaining a new open-end credit with the current
holder of the existing transaction or plan, a servicer acting on behalf of the current holder, or
an affiliate of either.
In addition to the charges listed above, points and fees for open-end credit plans also include the
following items:
• Fees charged for participation in the credit plan, payable at or before account opening, as
described in section 1026.4(c)(4), and
• Any transaction fee that will be charged to draw funds on the credit line, as described in
section 1026.32(b)(2)(viii).
Prepayment Penalty Definition – Section 1026.32(b)(6)
For closed-end credit transactions, a prepayment penalty is a charge imposed for paying all or
part of the transaction’s principal before the date on which the principal is due with limited
exceptions.
For open-end credit plans, a prepayment penalty is a charge imposed by the creditor if the
consumer terminates the credit plan prior to the end of its term.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 75
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
NOTE: Waived, bona fide third-party charges that are later imposed if the closed-end transaction
is prepaid or the consumer terminates the open-end credit plan sooner than 36 months after
consummation or account opening are not considered prepayment penalties.
NOTE: For closed-end transactions insured by the Federal Housing Administration and
consummated before January 21, 2015, interest charged consistent with the monthly interest
accrual amortization method is not a prepayment penalty, so long as the interest is charged
consistent with the monthly interest accrual amortization method used for those loans. See
Comment 32(b)(6)-1(iv).
High-Cost Mortgage Disclosures – Section 1026.32(c)
In addition to the other disclosure requirements of Regulation Z, high-cost mortgages require
certain additional information to be disclosed in conspicuous type size to consumers before
consummation of the transaction or account opening. These disclosures include:
• Notice to the consumer using the required language in section 1026.32(c)(1);
• The annual percentage rate (§1026.32(c)(2));
• Specified information concerning the regular or minimum periodic payment and the amount
of any balloon payment, if permitted under the high-cost mortgage limitations in section
1026.32(d); (§1026.32(c)(3))
• For variable-rate transactions, a statement that the interest and monthly payment may
increase, and the amount of the single maximum monthly payment based on the maximum
interest rate required to be included in the contract; (§1026.32(c)(4)) and
• The total amount borrowed for closed-end credit transactions or the credit limit for the plan
when the account is opened for an open-end credit plan. (§1026.32(c)(5))
NOTE: For closed-end credit transactions, if the amount borrowed includes charges to be
financed under section 1026.34(a)(10), this fact must be stated, grouped together with the
disclosure of amount borrowed. The disclosure of the amount borrowed will be treated as
accurate if it is not more than $100 above or below the amount required to be disclosed.
High-Cost Mortgage Limitations – Section 1026.32(d)
Certain loan terms, including negative amortization, interest rate increases after default, and
prepayment penalties are prohibited for high-cost mortgages. Others, including balloon payments
and due-on-demand clauses, are restricted.
• Balloon payments, defined as payments that are more than two times a regular periodic
payment, are generally prohibited for high-cost mortgages. (§1026.32(d)(1)(i)) However,
balloon payments are allowed in certain limited circumstances.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 76
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
For closed-end transactions, balloon payments are permitted when (a) the loan has a
o
payment schedule that is adjusted to seasonal or irregular income of the consumer; (b) the
loan is a “bridge” loan made in connection with the purchase of a new dwelling and
matures in 12 months or less; (c) the creditor is a small creditor operating predominantly
in rural or underserved areas that meets the criteria set forth in section 1026.43(f) for
small creditor rural or underserved balloon-payment qualified mortgages; or, (d) until
January 10, 2016, the creditor is a small creditor that meets the criteria set forth in
1026.43(e)(6)) for temporary balloon-payment qualified mortgages. (§1026.32(d)(1)(ii))
For an open-end credit plan where the terms of the plan provide for a draw period where
o
no payment is required, followed by a repayment period where no further draws may be
taken, the initial payment required after conversion to the repayment phase of the credit
plan is not considered a “balloon” payment. However, if the terms of an open-end credit
plan do not provide for a separate draw period and repayment period, the balloon
payment limitation applies. (§1026.32(d)(1)(iii))
• Acceleration clauses or demand features are limited and may only permit creditors to accelerate
and demand repayment of the entire outstanding balance of a high-cost mortgage if:
There is fraud or material misrepresentation by the consumer in connection with the loan
o
(§1026.32(d)(8)(i));
The consumer fails to meet the repayment terms of the agreement for any outstanding
o
balance that results in a default on the loan (§1026.32(d)(8)(ii)); or
There is any action (or inaction) by the consumer that adversely affects the rights of the
o
creditor’s security interest for the loan, such as the consumer failing to pay required taxes
on the property. (§1026.32(d)(8)(iii) and comments 32(d)(8)(iii)-1 and -2)
Prohibited Acts or Practices in Connection with High-Cost
Mortgages – Section 1026.34
In addition to the requirements in section 1026.32, Regulation Z imposes additional requirements
for high-cost mortgages, several of which are discussed below.
Refinancing Within One-Year – Section 1026.34(a)(3)
A creditor or assignee cannot refinance a consumer’s high-cost mortgage into a second high-cost
mortgage within the first year of the origination of the first loan, unless the second high-cost
mortgage is in the consumer’s interest.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 77
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Repayment Ability for High-Cost Mortgages
– Section 1026.34(a)(4)
Among other requirements, a creditor extending high-cost mortgage credit subject to section
1026.32 must not make such loans without regard to the consumer’s repayment ability as of
consummation or account opening as applicable. (§1026.34(a)(4))
For closed-end credit transactions that are high-cost mortgages, section 1026.34(a)(4) requires a
creditor to comply with the repayment ability requirements set forth in section 1026.43.
For open-end credit plans that are high-cost mortgages, a creditor may not open a credit plan for
a consumer where credit is or will be extended without regard to the consumer’s repayment
ability as of account opening, including the consumer’s current and reasonably expected income,
employment, assets other than the collateral, and current obligations, including any mortgage-
related obligations.
• For the purposes of these open-end requirements, mortgage-related obligations include,
among other things, property taxes, premiums and fees for mortgage-related insurance that
are required by the creditor, fees and special assessments such as those imposed by a
condominium association, and similar expenses required by another credit obligation
undertaken prior to or at account opening and secured by the same dwelling that secures the
high-cost mortgage transaction. (§1026.34(a)(4)(i))
• A creditor must also verify both current obligations and the amounts of income or assets that
it relies on to determine repayment ability using W-2s, tax returns, payroll receipts, financial
institution records, or other third-party documents that provide reasonably reliable evidence
of the consumer’s income or assets (§1026.34(a)(4)(ii)).
For open-end high-cost mortgages, a presumption of compliance is available but only if the
creditor:
• Verifies the consumer’s repayment ability as required under section 1026.34(a)(4)(ii));
• Determines the consumer’s repayment ability taking into account current obligations and
mortgage-related obligations, using the largest required minimum periodic payment based on
the assumptions that:
The consumer borrows the full credit line at account opening with no additional
o
extensions of credit;
The consumer makes only required minimum periodic payments during the draw period
o
and any repayment period; and
If the APR can increase, the maximum APR that is included in the contract applies to the
o
plan at account opening and will apply during the draw and any repayment period.
(§1026.34(a)(4)(iii)(B))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 78
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Assesses the consumer’s repayment ability, taking into account either the ratio of total debts
to income or the income the consumer will have after paying current obligations.
(§1026.34(a)(4)(iii)(C))
NOTE: No presumption of compliance will be available for an open-end high-cost mortgage
transaction in which the regular periodic payments, when aggregated, do not fully amortize the
outstanding principal balance except for transactions with balloon payments permitted under
section 1026.32(d)(1)(ii).
High-Cost Mortgage Pre-Loan Counseling
– Section 1026.34(a)(5)
Creditors that originate high-cost mortgages must receive written certification that the consumer
has obtained counseling on the advisability of the mortgage from a counselor approved by HUD,
or if permitted by HUD, a state housing finance authority (specific content for the certifications
can be found in section 1026.34(a)(5)(iv)). Counseling must occur after the consumer receives a
good faith estimate or initial TILA disclosure required by section 1026.40 (or, for transactions
where neither of those disclosures are provided, the disclosures required by section 1026.32(c)).
Additionally, counseling cannot be provided by a counselor who is employed by, or affiliated
with, the creditor. A creditor may pay the fees for counseling but is prohibited from conditioning
the payment of fees upon the consummation of the mortgage transaction or, if the consumer
withdraws his or her application, upon receipt of the certification. However, a creditor may
confirm that a counselor provided counseling to the consumer prior to paying these fees. Finally,
a creditor is prohibited from steering a consumer to a particular counselor.
Recommended Default – Section 1026.34(a)(6)
Creditors (and mortgage brokers) are prohibited from recommending or encouraging a
consumer to default on an existing loan or other debt prior to, and in connection with, the
consummation or account opening of a high-cost mortgage that refinances all or any portion
of the existing loan or debt.
Loan Modification and Deferral Fees
– Section 1026.34(a)(7)
Creditors, successors-in-interest, assignees, or any agents of these parties may not charge a
consumer any fee to modify, renew, extend, or amend a high-cost mortgage, or to defer any
payment due under the terms of the mortgage.
Late Fees – Section 1026.34(a)(8)
Late payment charges for a high-cost mortgage must be permitted by the terms of the loan
contract or open-end agreement and may not exceed four percent of the amount of the payment
that is past due. Late payment charges are permitted only if payment is not received by the end of
CFPB April 2015 TILA 79
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
the 15-day period beginning on the day the payment is due or, where interest on each installment
is paid in advance, by the end of the 30-day period beginning on the day the payment is due.
Creditors are also prohibited from “pyramiding” late fees—that is, charging late payments if any
delinquency is attributable only to a late payment charge that was imposed due to a previous late
payment, and the payment otherwise is considered a full payment for the applicable period (and
any allowable grace period). If a consumer fails to make a timely payment by the due date, then
subsequently resumes making payments but has not paid all past due payments, the creditor can
continue to impose late payment charges for the payments outstanding until the default is cured.
Fees for Payoff Statements – Section 1026.34(a)(9)
A creditor or servicer may not charge a fee for providing consumers (or authorized
representatives) with a payoff statement on a high-cost mortgage. Payoff statements must be
provided to consumers within five business days after receiving the request for a statement. A
creditor or servicer may charge a processing fee to cover the cost of providing the payoff
statement by fax or courier only, provided that such fee may not exceed an amount that is
comparable to fees imposed for similar services provided in connection with a non-high-cost
mortgage and that a payoff statement be made available to the consumer by an alternative
method without charge. If a creditor charges a fee for providing a payoff statement by fax or
courier, the creditor must disclose the fee prior to charging the consumer and must disclose to the
consumer that other methods for providing the payoff statement are available at no cost. Finally,
a creditor is permitted to charge a consumer a reasonable fee for additional payoff statements
during a calendar year in which four payoff statements have already been provided without
charge other than permitted processing fees.
Reverse Mortgages – Section 1026.33
A reverse mortgage is a non-recourse transaction secured by the consumer’s principal dwelling that
ties repayment (other than upon default) to the homeowner’s death or permanent move from, or
transfer of the title of, the home. Special disclosure requirements apply to reverse mortgages.
Higher-Priced Mortgage Loans – Section 1026.35(a)
A mortgage loan subject to section 1026.35 (higher-priced mortgage loan) is a closed-end
consumer credit transaction secured by the consumer’s principal dwelling with an APR that
exceeds the average prime offer rate for a comparable transaction as of the date the interest rate
is set by:
• 1.5 or more percentage points for loans secured by a first lien on a dwelling where the
amount of the principal obligation at the time of consummation does not exceed the
maximum principal obligation eligible for purchase by Freddie Mac;
• 2.5 or more percentage points for loans secured by a first lien on a dwelling, where the
amount of the principal obligation at the time of consummation exceeds the maximum
principal obligation eligible for purchase by Freddie Mac; or
CFPB April 2015 TILA 80
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• 3.5 or more percentage points for loans secured by a subordinate lien on a dwelling.
Average prime offer rate means an APR that is derived from average interest rates, points, and
other loan pricing terms currently offered to consumers by a representative sample of creditors
for mortgage transactions that have low-risk pricing characteristics. The CFPB publishes average
prime offer rates for a broad range of types of transactions in a table updated at least weekly, as
well as the methodology it uses to derive these rates. These rates are available on the website of
the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC).
http://www.ffiec.gov/ratespread/newcalchelp.aspx
Additionally, creditors extending mortgage loans subject to 1026.43(c) must verify a consumer’s
ability to repay as required by section 1026.43(c).
Finally, the regulation prohibits creditors from structuring a home-secured loan that does not
meet the definition of open-end credit as an open-end plan to evade these requirements.
Higher-Priced Mortgage Loans Escrow Requirement
– Section 1026.35(b)
In general, a creditor may not extend a higher-priced mortgage loan (including high-cost
mortgages that also meet the definition of a higher-priced mortgage loan), secured by a first lien
on a principal dwelling unless an escrow account is established before consummation for
payment of property taxes and premiums for mortgage-related insurance required by the creditor.
An escrow account for a higher-priced mortgage loan need not be established for:
• a transaction secured by shares in a cooperative,
• a transaction to finance the initial construction of a dwelling,
• a temporary or “bridge” loan with a term of 12 months or less, or
• a reverse mortgage subject to section 1026.33.
There is also a limited exemption that allows creditors to establish escrow accounts for property
taxes only (rather than for both property taxes and insurance) for loans secured by dwellings in a
“common interest community” under section 1026.35(b)(2)(ii), where dwelling ownership
requires participation in a governing association that is obligated to maintain a master insurance
policy insuring all dwellings. (§1026.35(b)(2)(ii))
An exemption to the higher-priced mortgage loan escrow requirement is available for first-lien
higher-priced mortgage loans made by certain creditors that operate predominantly in “rural” or
“underserved” areas. To make use of this exemption, a creditor must:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 81
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
1. Have made, during any of the three preceding calendar years, over half its covered
transactions in counties that meet the definition of “rural” or “underserved” as laid out in the
regulation,17
2. Together with any affiliates must not have made more than 500 covered transactions in the
preceding calendar year,
3. Must have had less than $2 billion in total assets as of the end of the preceding calendar
year,18 and
4. Together with any affiliates must not maintain escrow accounts for any extensions of
consumer credit secured by real property or a dwelling that it or its affiliate currently
services. However, such creditors (and their affiliates) are permitted to offer an escrow
account to accommodate distressed borrowers and may continue to maintain escrow accounts
established to comply with the rule for applications received on or after April 1, 2010, and
before January 1, 2014 without losing the exemption.
For first-lien higher-priced mortgage loans originated by a creditor that would not be required to
establish an escrow account based on the above exemption, if that creditor has obtained a
commitment for a higher-priced mortgage loan to be acquired by another company that is not
eligible for the exemption, an escrow account must be established. Since an escrow account will
be established for this loan, however, note that if the creditor that has obtained a commitment for
the higher-priced mortgage loan to be acquired by a non-exempt company would like to remain
eligible for the exemption above, neither the creditor nor its affiliates can service the loan on or
beyond the second periodic payment under the terms of the loan.
A creditor or servicer may cancel an escrow account only upon the earlier of termination of the
underlying loan, or a cancellation request from the consumer five years or later after
consummation. However, a creditor or servicer is not permitted to cancel an escrow account,
even upon request from the consumer, unless the unpaid principal balance of the higher-priced
mortgage loan is less than 80 percent of the original value of the property securing the loan and
the consumer is not currently delinquent or in default on the loan. (§1026.35(b)(3))
17
The regulation generally defines these two terms by reference to “urban influence codes” (for “rural”) and HMDA data (for
“underserved”). To ease compliance, however, the CFPB will post on its public website a list of “rural” and “underserved”
counties that creditors may rely on as a safe harbor. See comment 35(b)(2)(iv)-1.
18
The asset threshold will be adjusted automatically each year, based on the year-to-year change in the average of the Consumer
Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 82
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Higher-Priced Mortgage Loans Appraisal Requirement
– Section 1026.35(c)19
General Requirements, Exception, and Safe Harbor
A creditor may not extend a higher-priced mortgage loan without first obtaining a written
appraisal of the property to be mortgaged. The appraisal must be performed by a state-certified
or licensed appraiser (defined in part as an appraiser who conducts the appraisal in conformity
with the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice (USPAP) and the requirements
applicable to appraisers in title IX of FIRREA and its implementing regulations). The appraisal
must include a physical visit of the interior of the dwelling. The appraisal requirements do not
apply to:
• Qualified mortgages (QM) under 12 CFR 1026.43 or under rules on qualified mortgages
adopted by HUD or VA, (or, if promulgated, by USDA or RHS), including mortgages that
meet the QM criteria for these rules and are insured, guaranteed, or administered by those
agencies;
• An extension of credit equal to or less than the applicable threshold amount that is published
in the official staff commentary to the regulation, which is adjusted every year as applicable
to reflect increases in the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and Clerical
Workers;20
• A transaction secured by a mobile home, boat, or trailer;
• A transaction to finance the initial construction of a dwelling;
• A loan with maturity of 12 months or less, if the purpose of the loan is a “bridge” loan
connected with the acquisition of a dwelling intended to become the consumer’s principal
dwelling;
• A reverse mortgage transaction subject to 12 CFR 1026.33(a)
• A refinancing secured by a first lien, as defined in 12 CFR 1026.20(a) (except that the
creditor need not be the original creditor or a holder or servicer of the original obligation),
provided that the refinancing meets the following criteria:
The credit risk of the refinancing is retained by the person that held the credit risk of the
o
existing obligation and there is no commitment, at consummation, to transfer the credit
risk to another person; or, the refinancing is insured or guaranteed by the same Federal
government agency that insured or guaranteed the existing obligation;
19
The higher-priced mortgage loans appraisal requirement was adopted pursuant to an interagency rulemaking conducted by the
Board, the CFPB, the FDIC, FHFA, NCUA, and OCC. The Board codified the rule at 12 CFR 226.43, and the OCC codified the
rule at 12 CFR Part 34 and 12 CFR Part 164. There is no substantive difference among these three sets of rules.
20 From January 1, 2015, through December 31, 2015, the threshold amount is $25,500.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 83
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
The regular periodic payments under the refinance loan do not:
o
 Cause the principal balance to increase;
 Allow the consumer to defer repayment of principal; or
 Result in a balloon payment, as defined in 12 CFR 1026.18(s)(5)(i).
The proceeds from the refinancing are used solely to satisfy the existing obligation and
o
amounts attributed solely to the costs of the refinancing.
• A transaction secured by a manufactured home under the following conditions:21
If the transaction is for a new manufactured home and land, the exemption shall only
o
apply to the requirement that the appraiser conduct a physical visit of the interior of the
new manufactured home.
If the transaction is for a manufactured home and not land, for which the creditor obtains
o
one of the following and provides a copy to the consumer no later than three business
days prior to consummation of the transaction:
 For a new manufactured home, the manufacturer's invoice for the manufactured home
securing the transaction, provided that the date of manufacture is no earlier than 18
months prior to the creditor's receipt of the consumer's application for credit;
 A cost estimate of the value of the manufactured home securing the transaction
obtained from an independent cost service provider; or
 A valuation, as defined in 12 CFR 1026.42(b)(3), of the manufactured home
performed by a person who has no direct or indirect interest, financial or otherwise, in
the property or transaction for which the valuation is performed and has training in
valuing manufactured homes.
Transactions secured by an existing (used) manufactured home and land are not exempt
o
from the appraisal requirement.
A creditor may obtain a safe harbor for compliance with section 1026.35(c)(3)(i) by ordering that
the appraisal be completed in conformity with USPAP and the requirements applicable to
appraisers in title IX of FIRREA and its implementing regulations, verifying that the appraiser is
certified or licensed through the National Registry; and confirming that the written appraisal
contains the elements listed in Appendix N of Regulation Z. In addition, the creditor must have
no actual knowledge that the facts or certifications contained in the appraisal are inaccurate
(§1026.35(c)(3)(ii)).
21
Prior to July 18, 2015, appraisal requirements do not apply to transactions secured in whole or in part by a manufactured home
(12 CFR 1026.35(c)(2)). This section describes how the exemption will work under an amendment to the rule that takes effect on
July 18, 2015.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 84
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Additional Appraisals
The appraisal provisions in section 1026.35(c) also require creditors to obtain an additional
written appraisal before extending a higher-priced mortgage loan in two instances:
• First, when the dwelling that is securing the higher-priced mortgage loan was acquired by the
seller 90 or fewer days prior to the consumer’s agreement to purchase the property and the
price of the property has increased by more than 10 percent.
• Additionally, when the dwelling was acquired by the seller between 91 and 180 prior to the
consumer’s agreement to purchase the property, and the price of the property has increased
by more than 20 percent.
A creditor must obtain an additional interior appraisal meeting the same requirements as the first
appraisal (written report by a certified or licensed appraiser in compliance with USPAP and
FIRREA based upon an interior property visit), unless the creditor can demonstrate, by
exercising reasonable diligence, that the circumstances necessitating an additional appraisal do
not apply. A creditor can meet the reasonable diligence requirement if it bases its determination
on information contained in certain written source documents (such as a copy of the seller’s
recorded deed or a copy of a property tax bill). See Appendix O. If, after exercising reasonable
diligence, the creditor is unable to determine whether the circumstances necessitating an
additional appraisal apply, the creditor must obtain an additional appraisal.
If the creditor is required to obtain an additional written appraisal, the two required appraisals
must be conducted by different appraisers. Each appraisal obtained must include a physical visit
of the interior of the dwelling. In instances where two appraisals are required, creditors are
allowed to charge for only one of the two appraisals.
One of the two required written appraisals must contain an analysis of the difference between the
price at which the seller obtained the property and the price the consumer agreed to pay to
acquire the property, an analysis of changes in market conditions between when the seller
acquired the property and when the consumer agreed to purchase the property, and a review of
improvements made to the property between the two dates.
The higher-priced mortgage loan additional appraisal requirements do not apply to the extension
of credit that finances the acquisition of a property:
• From a local, state, or federal government agency;
• From a person who acquired title to the property through foreclosure, deed-in-lieu of
foreclosure, or other similar judicial or non-judicial procedures as a result of the person’s
exercise of rights as the holder of a defaulted mortgage;
• From a non-profit entity as part of a local, state, or federal government program permitted to
acquire single-family properties for resale from a person who acquired title through
foreclosure, deed in lieu of foreclosure, or other similar judicial or non-judicial procedures;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 85
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• From a person who acquired title to the property by inheritance or by court order as a result
of a dissolution of marriage, civil union, or domestic partnership, or of partition of joint or
marital assets;
• From an employer or relocation agency in connection with the relocation of an employee;
• From a servicemember who received a deployment or permanent change of station order
after the servicemember purchased the property;
• Located in a federal disaster area if the requirements of title XI of FIRREA have been waived
by the federal financial institutions regulatory agencies for as long as that waiver would
apply; or
• Located in a rural county as defined by the CFPB in section 1026.35(b)(2)(iv)(A).
Application Disclosures and Copy of Appraisal
Finally, creditors must provide consumers who apply for a loan covered by the appraisal
requirements in section 1026.35(c) with a disclosure providing information relating to appraisals.
A creditor must provide consumers with disclosures no later than the third business day after the
creditor receives an application for a higher-priced mortgage loan, or no later than the third
business day after the loan requested becomes a higher-priced mortgage loan. Additionally, a
creditor must provide, at no cost to the consumer, a copy of each written appraisal performed in
connection with a loan covered by the appraisal requirements in section 1026.35(c) no later than
three business days prior to consummation or, if the loan will not be consummated, no later than
30 days after the creditor determines that the loan will not be consummated. 22
Prohibited Acts or Practices in Connection with Credit
Secured by a Consumer’s Dwelling – Section 1026.36
Loan Originator – Section 1026.36(a)
The term “loan originator” means a person who, in expectation of direct or indirect
compensation or other monetary gain or for direct or indirect compensation or other monetary
gain, performs any of the following activities:
• Takes an application, offers, arranges, assists a consumer in obtaining or applying to obtain,
negotiates, or otherwise obtains or makes an extension of consumer credit for another person;
or
22
Creditors may use the disclosure required under the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) valuations rule to satisfy the
disclosure requirements of the higher-priced mortgage loans appraisal rule for loans covered by both. After August 1, 2015, the
new Loan Estimate model form appraisal language required by the TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure Rule
(§1026.37(m)(1)(iii)) will meet the requirements of both the ECOA valuations rule (12 CFR 1002.14(a)(2)) and the higher-priced
mortgage loans appraisal rule.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 86
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Through advertising or other means of communication represents to the public that such
person can or will perform any of these activities.
The term “loan originator” includes an employee, agent, or contractor of the creditor or loan
originator organization if the employee, agent, or contractor meets this definition. The term “loan
originator” also includes a creditor that engages in loan origination activities if the creditor does
not finance the transaction at consummation out of the creditor’s own resources, including by
drawing on a bona fide warehouse line of credit or out of deposits held by the creditor.
The term “loan originator” does not include:
• A person who performs purely administrative or clerical tasks on behalf of a person who
takes applications or offers or negotiates credit terms;
• An employee of a manufactured home retailer who does not take a consumer credit
application, offer or negotiate credit terms, or advise consumers on available credit terms;
• A person that performs only real estate brokerage activity and is licensed or registered in
accordance with applicable state law, unless that person is compensated by a creditor or loan
originator for a consumer credit transaction subject to section 1026.36;
• A seller financer that meets the criteria established in sections 1026.36(a)(4) or (a)(5); or
• A servicer, or a servicer’s employees, agents, and contractors who offer or negotiate the
terms of a mortgage for the purpose of renegotiating, modifying, replacing, or subordinating
principal of an existing mortgage where consumers are behind in their payments, in default,
or have a reasonable likelihood of becoming delinquent or defaulting. This exception does
not, however, apply to such persons if they refinance a mortgage or assign a mortgage to a
different consumer.
An “individual loan originator” is a natural person who meets the definition of “loan
originator.” Finally, a “loan originator organization” is any loan originator that is not an
individual loan originator. A loan originator organization would include banks, thrifts, finance
companies, credit unions and mortgage brokers.
Prohibited Loan Originator Compensation: Payments Based
on a Term of a Transaction – Section 1026.36(d)(1)
With limited exceptions, loan originators cannot receive (and no person can pay directly or
indirectly), compensation in connection with closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by
a dwelling based on a term of a transaction, the terms of multiple transactions, or the terms of
multiple transactions by multiple individual loan originators. The loan originator compensation
provisions do not apply to open-end home-equity lines of credit or to credit secured by a
consumer’s interest in a timeshare plan described in 11 U.S.C. 101(53D).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 87
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
A “term of a transaction” is any right or obligation of the parities to a credit transaction. The
amount of credit extended is not a term of a transaction, provided that such compensation is
based on a fixed percentage of the amount of credit extended (but may be subject to a minimum
or maximum dollar amount).
NOTE: A review of whether compensation, which includes salaries, commissions, and any
financial or similar incentive, is based on the terms of a transaction requires an objective
analysis. If compensation would have been different if a transaction term had been different, then
the compensation is prohibited. The regulation does not prevent compensating loan originators
differently on different transactions, provided the difference is not based on a term of a
transaction or on a proxy for a term of a transaction (a factor that consistently varies with a term
or terms of the transaction over a significant number of transactions and which the loan
originator has the ability to manipulate).
An individual loan originator may receive (and a person may pay):
• Compensation in the form of a contribution to a defined contribution plan that is a designated
tax-advantage plan unless the contribution is tied to the terms of the individual’s
transaction(s); (§1026.36.(d)(1)(iii))
• Compensation in the form of a benefit under a defined benefit plan that is a designated tax-
advantaged plan (§1026.36(d)(1)(iii))
• Compensation under a non-deferred profits-based compensation plan provided that:
The compensation paid to an individual loan originator is not directly or indirectly based
o
on the terms of the individual’s transaction(s); and
Either:
o
 The compensation paid to the individual loan originator does not exceed 10 percent
(in aggregate) of the individual loan originator’s total compensation corresponding to
the time period for which the compensation under the non-deferred profits-based
compensation plan is paid; or
 The individual loan originator was the loan originator of 10 or fewer transactions
during the 12 months preceding the date the compensation was determined.
(§1026.36(d)(1)(iv))
For more information pertaining to permissible compensation, see the commentary to section
1026.36(d).23
23
In addition to the requirements listed here, section 1026.25(c) imposes specific record retention requirements for creditors and
loan originator organizations that compensate loan originators.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 88
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Prohibited Loan Originator Compensation:
Dual Compensation – Section 1026.36(d)(2)
Loan originators that receive compensation directly from consumers in consumer credit
transactions secured by a dwelling, (except for open-end home-equity lines of credit or to loans
secured by a consumer’s interest in a timeshare plan) may not receive additional compensation
directly or indirectly from any other person in connection with that transaction.
(§1026.36(d)(1)(i)(A)(1)) This prohibition includes compensation received from a third-party
to the transaction to pay for some or all of the consumer’s costs. (§1026.36(d)(1)(i)(B))
Further, a person is prohibited from compensating a loan originator when that person “knows
or has reason to know” that the consumer has paid compensation to the loan originator.
(§1026.36(d)(2)(i)(A)(2))
However, even if a loan originator organization receives compensation directly from a consumer,
the organization can compensate the individual loan originator, subject to section 1026.36(d)(1).
(§1026.36(d)(2)(i)(C))
Prohibition on Steering – Section 1026.36(e)
Loan originators are prohibited from directing or “steering” consumers to loans based on the fact
that the originator will receive greater compensation for the loan from the creditor than in other
transactions the originator offered or could have offered to the consumer, unless the
consummated transaction is in the consumer’s interest. A loan originator complies with the
prohibition on steering (but not the loan originator compensation provisions) by obtaining loan
options from a significant number of the creditors with which the loan originator regularly does
business and, for each loan type in which the consumer has expressed interest, presenting the
consumer with loan options for which the loan originator believes in good faith the consumer
likely qualifies, provided that the presented loan options include all of the following:
• The loan with the lowest interest rate;
• The loan with the lowest interest rate without certain enumerated risky features (such as
prepayment penalties, negative amortization, or a balloon payment in the first seven years); and
• The loan with the lowest total dollar amount of discount points, origination points or
origination fees (or, if two or more loans have the same total dollar amount of discount
points, origination points or origination fees, the loan with the lowest interest rate that has the
lowest total dollar amount of discount points, origination points or origination fees).
The anti-steering provisions do not apply to open-end home-equity lines of credit or to loans
secured by a consumer’s interest in a timeshare plan.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 89
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Loan Originator Qualification Requirements
– Section 1026.36(f)
Individual loan originators and loan originator organizations must, when required under state or
federal law, be registered and licensed under those laws, including the Safe and Fair
Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Action of 2008 (SAFE Act).24 Loan originator
organizations other than government agencies or state housing finance agencies must:
• Comply with all applicable state law requirements for legal existence and foreign
qualification; (§1026.36(f)(1))
• Ensure that each individual loan originator who works for the loan originator organization
(e.g., an employee, under a brokerage agreement) is licensed or registered to the extent the
individual is required to be licensed or registered under the SAFE Act prior to acting as a
loan originator in a consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling. (§1026.36(f)(2))
The requirements are different for loan originator organizations whose employees are not
required to be licensed and are not licensed pursuant to 12 CFR section 1008.103 or state SAFE
Act implementing laws (including employees of depository institutions and bona fide non-
profits). For their employees hired on or after January 1, 2014 (or hired before this date but not
subject to any statutory or regulatory background standards at the time, or for any individual loan
originators regardless of when hired that the organization believes, based on reliable information
do not meet the qualification standards), loan originator employers must obtain before the
individual acts as a loan originator in a consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling:
• A criminal background check through the Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and
Registry (NMLSR) or, in the case of an individual loan originator who is not a registered
loan originator under NMLSR, a criminal background check from a law enforcement agency
or commercial service; (§1026.36(f)(3)(i)(A))
• A credit report from a consumer reporting agency (as defined in section 603(p) of the Fair
Credit Reporting Act) secured, where applicable, in compliance with section 604(b) of
FCRA; (§1026.36(f)(3)(i)(B)) and
• Information from the NMLSR about any administrative, civil, or criminal findings by any
government jurisdiction or, in the case of an individual loan originator who is not a registered
loan originator under the NMLSR, such information from the individual loan originator.
(§1026.36(f)(3)(i)(C))
24
Section 1026.36(f) applies to closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling except a loan that is secured by a
consumer’s interest in a timeshare plan described in 11 U.S.C. 101(53D). For purposes of 1026.36(f), a loan originator includes
all creditors that engage in loan origination activities, not just those who table fund.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 90
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Based on the information obtained above and any other information reasonably available, the
loan originator employer must determine for such an employee prior to allowing the individual to
act as a loan originator in a consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling:
• That the individual has not been convicted of, or pleaded guilty or nolo contendere to, a
felony in a domestic or military court during the preceding seven-year period or, in the case
of a felony involving an act of fraud, dishonesty, a breach of trust, or money laundering, at
any time; and (§1026.36(f)(3)(ii)(A)(1))
NOTE: Whether the conviction of a crime is considered a felony is determined by whether
the conviction was classified as a felony under the law of the jurisdiction under which the
individual is convicted. Additionally, a loan originator organization may employ an
individual with a felony conviction (or a plea of nolo contendere) as a loan originator if that
individual has received consent from the FDIC, (or the FRB, as applicable) the NCUA, or the
Farm Credit Administration under their own applicable statutory authority.
(§1026.36(f)(3)(iii))
• Has demonstrated financial responsibility, character, and general fitness such as to warrant a
determination that the individual loan originator will operate honestly, fairly, and efficiently.
The loan originator organization must also provide periodic training to each such employee that
covers federal and state legal requirements that apply to the individual loan originator’s loan
origination activities.
Name and NMLSR ID on Loan Documentation
– Section 1026.36(g)
Section 1026.36(g) applies to closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling
except a loan that is secured by a consumer’s interest in a timeshare plan described in 11 U.S.C.
101(53D). For purposes of 1026.36(g), a loan originator includes all creditors that engage in loan
origination activities, not just those who table fund.
For consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling, loan originator organizations must
include certain identifying information on loan documentation provided to consumers. The
loan documents must include the loan originator organization’s name, NMLSR ID (if
applicable), and the name of the individual loan originator that is primarily responsible for the
origination as it appears in the NMLSR, as well as the individual’s NMLSR ID. This
information is required on credit applications, the Loan Estimate, the Closing Disclosure, the
note or loan contract, and the documents securing an interest in the property.
Policies and Procedures to Ensure and Monitor Compliance
– Section 1026.36(j)
Depository institutions (including credit unions) must establish and maintain written policies and
procedures reasonably designed to ensure and monitor compliance of the depository institution,
its employees, and its subsidiaries and their employees with the requirements of section
CFPB April 2015 TILA 91
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
1026.36(d) (prohibited payments to loan originators), section 1026.36(e) (prohibition on
steering), section 1026.36(f) (loan originator qualifications), and section 1026.36(g) (name and
NMLSR ID on loan documents). The written policies and procedures must be appropriate to the
nature, size, complexity, and scope of the mortgage lending activities of the depository and its
subsidiaries. (§1026.36(j))
Prohibition on Mandatory Arbitration or Waivers of Certain
Consumer Rights – Section 1026.36(h)
A contract or other agreement for a consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling (including
a home equity line of credit secured by the consumer’s principal dwelling) may not include terms
that require mandatory arbitration or any other non-judicial procedure to resolve any controversy
arising out of the transaction. Also, a contract or other agreement relating to such a consumer
credit transaction may not be applied or interpreted to bar a consumer from bringing a claim in
court under any provision of law for damages or other relief in connection with an alleged
violation of any federal law. However, a creditor and a consumer could agree, after a dispute or
claim under the transaction arises, to settle or use arbitration or other non-judicial procedure to
resolve that dispute or claim.
Prohibition on Financing Credit Insurance
– Section 1026.36(i)
Creditors are prohibited from “financing” (i.e., providing a consumer the right to defer payment
beyond the monthly period in which the premium or fee is due), either directly or indirectly,
premiums or fees for credit insurance in connection with a consumer credit transaction secured
by a dwelling (including a home equity line of credit secured by the consumer’s principal
dwelling). This prohibition includes financing fees for credit life, credit disability, credit
unemployment, credit property insurance, or any other accident, loss-of-income, life, or health
insurance or payment for debt cancellation or suspension. This prohibition does not apply to
credit unemployment insurance where the premiums are reasonable, the creditor receives no
direct or indirect compensation in connection with the premiums, and the premiums are paid
under a separate insurance contract and not to an affiliate of the creditor. This prohibition also
does not apply to credit insurance where premiums or fees are “calculated” and paid in full “on a
monthly basis” (i.e., determined mathematically by multiplying a rate by the actual monthly
outstanding balance).
Negative Amortization Counseling – Section 1026.36(k)
A creditor may not extend a negative amortizing mortgage loan to a first-time borrower in
connection with a closed-end transaction secured by a dwelling, other than a reverse mortgage or
a transaction secured by a timeshare, unless the creditor receives documentation that the
consumer has obtained homeownership counseling from a HUD certified or approved counselor.
Additionally, a creditor extending a negative amortizing mortgage loan to a first-time borrower
may not steer, direct, or require the consumer to use a particular counselor.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 92
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Loan Servicing Practices
Servicers of mortgage loans are prohibited from engaging in certain practices, such as
pyramiding late fees. In addition, servicers are required to credit consumers’ loan payments as of
the date of receipt and provide a payoff statement within a reasonable time, not to exceed seven
business days of a written request.
Payment Processing – Section 1026.36(c)(1)
For a consumer credit transaction secured by a consumer’s principal dwelling, a loan servicer:
• Cannot fail to credit a periodic payment to the consumer’s loan account as of the date of
receipt, except in instances where the delay will not result in a charge to the consumer or in
the reporting of negative information to a consumer reporting agency.
NOTE: For the purposes of section 1026.36(c) a periodic payment is “an amount sufficient to
cover principal, interest, and escrow for any given billing cycle.” If the consumer owes late
fees, other fees, or non-escrow payments but makes a full periodic payment, the servicer
must credit the periodic payment as of the date of receipt.
• Cannot retain a partial payment (any amount less than a periodic payment) in a suspense or
unapplied payment account without disclosing to the consumer in the periodic statement (if
required) the total amount(s) held in the suspense account and applying the payment to the
balance upon accumulation of sufficient funds to equal a periodic payment.
If a servicer has provided written requirements for accepting payments in writing but then
accepts payments that do not conform to the written requirements, the servicer must credit the
payment as of five days after receipt.
Pyramiding of Late Fees – Section 1026.36(c)(2)
A servicer may not impose on the consumer any late fee or delinquency charge in connection
with a payment, when the only delinquency is attributable to late fees or delinquency charges
assessed on an earlier payment, and the payment is otherwise a periodic payment for the
applicable period and is received on its due date or within any applicable courtesy period.
Providing Payoff Statements – Section 1026.36(c)(3)
For consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling, including home equity lines of credit
under section 1026.40(a), a creditor, assignee, or servicer may not fail to provide, within a
reasonable time, but no more than seven business days, after receiving a written request from the
consumer or person acting on behalf of the consumer, an accurate statement of the total
outstanding balance that would be required to pay the consumer’s obligation in full as of a
specific date.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 93
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
NOTE: For purposes of section 1026.36(c)(3), when a creditor, assignee, or servicer is not able
to provide the statement within seven business days because a loan is in bankruptcy or
foreclosure, because the loan is a reverse mortgage or shared appreciation mortgage, or because
of natural disasters or similar circumstances, the payoff statement must be provided within a
reasonable time.
TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosures – Sections 1026.37
and 1026.38
For most closed-end consumer mortgages, creditors must provide two disclosures, the Loan
Estimate and the Closing Disclosure, to consumers for mortgage applications received on or after
August 1, 2015. The Loan Estimate is a three-page form that provides disclosures to help
consumers understand the key features, costs, and risks of the mortgage loan for which they are
applying. This form must be delivered or placed in the mail no later than three business days
after the creditor receives a consumer’s mortgage loan application. The Closing Disclosure is a
five-page form that helps consumers understand all of the costs of the transaction. This form
generally must be received by the consumer at least three business days before consummation.
Both forms use similar language and design to make it easier for consumers to locate key
information, such as the interest rate, monthly payments, and costs to close the loan.
The Loan Estimate form replaces the Good Faith Estimate designed by HUD under RESPA, and
the “early” Truth in Lending disclosure designed by the Federal Reserve Board under TILA. The
regulation and the Official Interpretations contain detailed instructions as to how each line on the
Loan Estimate form should be completed. There are sample forms for different types of loan
products. See CFPB’s TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure, Guide to the Loan Estimate and
Closing Disclosure forms (TILA-RESPA Guide to Forms) for a detailed, step-by-step walk-
through for completing the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure. The Loan Estimate form
also incorporates new disclosures required by Congress under the Dodd-Frank Act.
The Closing Disclosure form replaces the HUD-1 for loan closing, which was designed by HUD
under RESPA. It also replaces the revised Truth in Lending disclosure designed by the Board
under TILA. The rule and the Official Interpretations contain detailed instructions as to how each
line on the Closing Disclosure form should be completed. The Closing Disclosure form contains
additional new disclosures required by the Dodd-Frank Act and a detailed accounting of the
settlement transaction. See CFPB’s TILA-RESPA Guide to Forms for a detailed, step-by-step
walk-through for completing the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure.
The rules on who provides the disclosures, timing, limits on when fees can be charged, early
estimates, and limits on increases in charges are in 12 CFR 1026.19(e) and (f), described in
subpart A.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 94
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Loan Estimate – Content of Disclosures for Certain
Mortgage Transactions – Section 1026.37
Loan Estimate form required (§1026.37(o))
The Loan Estimate generally must provide consumers with a good faith estimate of credit costs
and transaction terms, and satisfy timing and delivery requirements set forth in the rule.
For any transactions subject to 12 CFR 1026.19(e) that are federally-related mortgage loans
subject to RESPA (which will include most mortgages), creditors must use form H-24, set forth
in appendix H. (§1026.37(o)(3)(i)) (See also §1024.2(b) for definition of federally related
mortgage loan.)
For other loans subject to 12 CFR 1026.19(e) that are not federally related mortgage loans, the
disclosures must be made with headings, content, and format substantially similar to form H-24.
(§1026.37(o)(3)(ii))
The disclosures may be provided to the consumer in electronic form, subject to compliance with
the consumer consent and other applicable provisions of the Electronic Signatures in Global and
National Commerce Act (15 U.S.C. 7001 et seq.). (§1026.37(o)(3)(iii))
Information required on the Loan Estimate form. Most disclosures on the Loan Estimate
form are required to be labeled using specific nomenclature, headings, and formatting. For
example, the regulation requires that the form disclose the contract sale price, labeled “Sale
Price” (or if there is no seller, the estimated value of the property, labeled “Prop. Value”).
Further, in some instances, the regulation directs lines on the disclosure to be left blank where
there is no charge (see, e.g., §1026.37(g)(2)(v)) or sets forth the maximum number of items that
may be disclosed (see, e.g., §1026.37(g)(3)(v)). See the regulation, Form H-24, and the
Regulation Z procedures for specific obligations regarding each required disclosure.
Rounding. Dollar amounts must be rounded to the nearest whole dollar where noted in the
regulation, including adjustments after consummation for loan amount, interest rate, and periodic
payment; and details about prepayment penalties and balloon payments, minimum and maximum
amounts for principal and interest payments and range of payments, maximum mortgage
insurance premiums, escrows, taxes and insurance and assessments, closing costs (loan costs and
other costs), cash to close, and adjustable payment and comparisons. (§1026.37(o)(4)(i)(A))
The per diem amount for prepaid interest paid per day and the monthly amounts required to be
disclosed for escrows of homeowner’s insurance, mortgage insurance, or property taxes must not
be rounded. (§1026.37(o)(4)(i)(B))
If an amount is required to be rounded but is composed of other amounts that are not required or
permitted to be rounded, the unrounded amounts should be used to calculate the total, and the
final sum should be rounded. Conversely, if an amount is required to be rounded and is
composed of rounded amounts, the rounded amounts should be used to calculate the total.
(Comment 37(o)(4)-2)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 95
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Percentage amounts may not be rounded and should be disclosed up to two or three decimals, as
needed. These include the interest rate, adjustments after consummation (to the loan amount,
interest rate, or periodic payment), points itemized under origination charges, adjustable interest
rate and total interest percentage or “TIP.” The annual percentage rate must be disclosed up to
three decimal places and is not rounded. If a percentage amount is a whole number, only the whole
number should be disclosed, with no decimals. (§1026.37(o)(4)(ii); Comment 37(o)(4)(ii)-1)
Page 1: General information, loan terms, projected payments, and costs at closing.
Page 1 of the Loan Estimate discloses general information about the creditor, the applicant(s),
and the loan. It also includes a Loan Terms table with descriptions of applicable information
about the loan, a Projected Payments table, a summary Costs at Closing table, and a link for
consumers to obtain more information about loans secured by real property at a website
maintained by the CFPB. (§§1026.37(a)-(e))
General information. Page 1 of the Loan Estimate requires the title “Loan Estimate” and the
statement “Save this Loan Estimate to compare with your Closing Disclosure.” (§1026.37(a)(1),
(2)) The top of page 1 also requires the name and address of the creditor. (§1026.37(a)(3)) A
logo can be used for, and a slogan included along with, the creditor’s name and address, so long
as the logo or slogan does not cause this information to exceed the space provided on Form H-24
for that information. (§1026.37(o)(5)(iii)) If there are multiple creditors, only the name of the
creditor completing the Loan Estimate should be used. (Comment 37(a)(3)-1) If a mortgage
broker is completing the Loan Estimate, the mortgage broker should make a good faith effort to
disclose the name and address of the creditor as required by 12 CFR 1026.19(e)(1)(i). However,
if the name of the creditor is not yet known, this space may be left blank. (Comment 37(a)(3)-2)
Below the creditor information, the form requires the date the creditor mails or delivers the
disclosures to the consumer; the name and mailing address of the consumer(s) applying for the
credit; the address, including the zip code, of the property that secures or will secure the
transaction, or if the address is unavailable, the location of such property, including a zip code;
and the contract sale price (or if there is no seller, the estimated value of the property).
(§1026.37(a)(4)-(6))
On the top right side of the first page, the form requires the loan term to maturity (stated in years
or months, or both, as applicable; and loan purpose (purchase, refinance, construction or home
equity loan). (§1026.37(a)(8)-(9)) This section of the form also requires the product type
(adjustable rate, step rate, or fixed rate) and, preceding the type, any features that may change the
periodic payment, including negative amortization, interest only, step payment, balloon payment,
or seasonal payment features, as applicable. If the product has an adjustable or step rate, or a
feature that may change the periodic payment, the product disclosure must also be preceded by a
disclosure of the duration of any introductory rate or payment period, and the first adjustment
period, as applicable. (§1026.37(a)(10) This section of the form also requires the loan type
(conventional, FHA, VA, or other), and loan ID#. (§1026.37(a)(11)-(12)) Further, there must be
a statement of whether the interest rate is locked for a specific time, and if so, the date and time
when that period ends. It must also include a statement that the interest rate, any points, and any
CFPB April 2015 TILA 96
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
lender credits may change unless the interest rate has been locked, and the date and time
(including the applicable time zone) at which estimated closing costs expire. (§1026.37(a)(13))
Loan Terms table.
The Loan Terms table follows the general information requirements on page 1 of the Loan
Estimate. For the Loan Terms table, the creditor must disclose the loan amount (the amount of
credit to be extended under the terms of the legal obligation), interest rate applicable to the
transaction at consummation, and specified principal and interest payments. (§1026.37(b)(1)-(3))
For each such element, the disclosure must answer the question, either affirmatively or
negatively, whether the amount can increase after consummation. If the amount can increase, the
loan must disclose additional information. (§1026.37(b)(6)) The Loan Terms table must also
include information about prepayment penalties and balloon payments.
Loan amount. If the loan amount may increase after consummation, the disclosure must
include the maximum principal balance for the transaction and the due date of the last payment
that may cause the principal balance to increase. The disclosure must also indicate whether the
maximum principal balance is potential or is scheduled to occur under the terms of the legal
obligation. (§1026.37(b)(6)(i))
Interest rate. If it is an adjustable rate transaction where the interest rate at consummation
is not known, the disclosed rate is the fully indexed rate (which means the index value and
margin at the time of consummation) (§1026.37(b)(2)). If the interest may increase after
consummation, the creditor must disclose the frequency of interest rate adjustments, the date
when the interest rate may first adjust, the maximum interest rate, and the first date when the
interest rate can reach the maximum interest rate, followed by a reference to the adjustable rate
table required by 12 CFR 1026.37(j) in the Closing Cost Details section of the Loan Estimate. If
the loan term may increase based on an interest rate adjustment, that fact must be included, as
well as the maximum possible loan term determined in accordance with section 1026.37(a)(8).
(§1026.37(b)(6)(ii))
Principal and interest payment. The creditor must disclose the initial periodic payment
that will be due under the terms of the legal obligation, immediately preceded by the applicable
unit period, and a statement referring to the payment amount that includes any mortgage
insurance and escrow payments that is required to be disclosed in the Projected Payments table.
(§1026.37(b)(3)) If the monthly principal and interest payment can increase after closing, the
creditor must also disclose: the scheduled frequency of adjustments to the periodic principal and
interest payment; the due date of the first adjusted principal and interest payment; the maximum
possible periodic principal and interest payment; and the date when the periodic principal and
interest payment may first equal the maximum principal and interest payment. If any adjustments
to the principal and interest payment are not the result of a change to the interest rate, the creditor
must reference the adjustable interest rate table disclosure required by 12 CFR 1026.37(i). If
there is a period during which only interest is required to be paid, the disclosure must also state
that fact and the due date of the last periodic payment of such period. (§1026.37(b)(6)(iii))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 97
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Prepayment penalties and balloon payments. The Loan Terms table must also state
affirmatively or negatively whether the transaction includes a prepayment penalty (for these
purposes, a charge imposed for paying all or part of a transaction's principal before the date on
which the principal is due, other than a waived, bona fide third-party charge that the creditor
imposes if the consumer prepays all of the transaction's principal sooner than 36 months after
consummation) or a balloon payment (for these purposes, a payment that is more than two times
a regular periodic payment). (§1026.37(b)(4) and (5))
Projected Payments table.
The Projected Payments table is located directly below the Loan Terms table on page 1 of the
Loan Estimate. The Projected Payments table shows estimates of the periodic payments that the
consumer will make over the life of the loan. Creditors must disclose estimates of the following
periodic payment amounts in the Projected Payments table: periodic principal and interest (or
range of periodic payments); mortgage insurance; estimated escrow; and estimated total monthly
payment. (§1026.37(c)(2)) Creditors must also disclose estimated taxes, insurance, and
assessments, even if not paid with escrow funds (and whether these items will be paid with funds
from the consumer’s escrow account). (§1026.37(c)(4))
Generally, the creditor will show in one column the initial periodic payment (or range of
payments if required). Depending on the features of the loan, subsequent periodic payments also
may be required to be disclosed. However, no more than four separate periodic payments or
ranges of payments may be disclosed, beginning with the initial periodic payment. Events that
require disclosure of separate periodic payments or ranges include: changes to the periodic
principal and interest payment; a scheduled balloon payment: an automatic termination of
mortgage insurance or its equivalent; and the anniversary of the due date of the initial periodic
payment or range of payments that immediately follows the occurrence of multiple events that
change the periodic principal and interest. The regulation addresses how to disclose these events
when the event occurs after the third separate periodic payment or range of payments disclosed.
(§1026.37(c)(1))
Each separate payment or range of payments must be itemized according to the regulation,
including the amount payable for principal and interest. The regulation provides instructions for
itemizing payments that include an interest only payment, payments on loans with an adjustable
interest rate, and payments on a loan that has both an adjustable interest rate and a negative
amortization feature. Additionally, the regulation requires that each separate periodic payment or
range of payments itemize the maximum corresponding payable for mortgage insurance
premiums and the amount payable into escrow (with a statement that the amount disclosed may
increase over time and a calculation of the total monthly payment). (§1026.37(c)(2))
Below the estimated total monthly payment, the Projected Payments table discloses estimated
taxes, insurance, and assessments. These are stated as a monthly amount and include a statement
that the amount may increase over time. The creditor provides these estimates even if there will
be no escrow account established for these costs. The table also requires a statement of whether
the amount disclosed includes payments for property taxes or other amounts; a description of any
CFPB April 2015 TILA 98
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
such other amounts; and an indication of whether such amounts will be paid by the creditor using
escrow account funds. It includes a statement that the consumer must separately pay the taxes,
insurance, and assessments that are not paid by the creditor using escrow account funds; and a
reference to the information disclosed under the subheading on the Loan Estimate titled “Initial
Escrow Payment at Closing.” (§1026.37(c)(4))
The creditor estimates property taxes and homeowner's insurance using the taxable assessed
value of the real property securing the transaction after consummation, including the value of
any improvements on the property or to be constructed on the property, if known, whether or not
such construction will be financed from the proceeds of the transaction, for property taxes; and
the replacement costs of the property during the initial year after the transaction, for premiums or
other charges for insurance against loss of or damage to property identified in 12 CFR
1026.4(b)(8). (§1026.37(c)(5))
Costs at Closing table.
This table, located at the bottom of page 1, provides disclosures on estimated Closing Costs and
estimated Cash to Close. (§1026.37(d)(1)) These disclosures offer the consumer a high-level
summary of estimated closing costs and cash required to close (including closing costs) and
reference the more detailed itemizations found on page 2 of the Loan Estimate.
(§1026.37(d)(1)(i)(E) and §1026.37(d)(1)(ii)(B))
Items that are disclosed include an estimate of Total Closing Costs, as well as the key inputs
making up this total: Loan Costs, Other Costs, and Lender Credits (and the fact that total closing
costs include these amounts). (§1026.37(d)(1)(i)) These disclosures also provide a high-level
summary of the estimated amount of cash required to close, which is also itemized more
specifically on page 2 of the Loan Estimate. (§1026.37(d)(1)(ii)) The regulation provides an
optional alternative Cash to Close table for transactions that do not involve a seller. The creditor
may alternatively disclose, using the label “Cash to Close,” the cash to or from the consumer
(pursuant to 1026.37(h)(2)(iv)), a statement of whether the disclosed estimated amount is due
from or to the consumer, and a statement referring the consumer to the alternative Calculating
Cash to Close table for transactions without a seller (pursuant to 1026.37(h)(2)).
(§1026.37(d)(2))
Page 2: Closing cost details
Page 2 of the Loan Estimate contains a good faith itemization of the “Loan Costs” and “Other
Costs” associated with the loan. (§1026.37(f) and (g)) Generally, Loan Costs are those costs paid
by the consumer to the creditor and third-party providers of services the creditor requires to be
obtained by the consumer during the origination of the loan. (§1026.37(f)) Other Costs include
taxes, governmental recording fees, and certain other payments involved in the real estate closing
process. (§1026.37(g)) Page 2 also includes an itemized “Calculating Cash to Close” table to
show the consumer how the amount of cash needed at closing is calculated. (§1026.37(h)) In
addition, for transactions with adjustable monthly payments not based on changes to the interest
CFPB April 2015 TILA 99
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
rate, page 2 must include an Adjustable Payment (AP) table with relevant information about how
the monthly payments will change. (§1026.37(i)) Further, for transactions with adjustable
interest rates, page 2 must include an Adjustable Interest Rate (AIR) table with relevant
information about how the interest rate will change. (§1026.37(j))
If state law requires additional disclosures, those additional disclosures may be made on a
document whose pages are separate from, and not presented as part of, the Loan Estimate.
(Comments 37(f)(6)-1 and 37(g)(8)-1)
Loan Costs table. This table includes all loan costs associated with the transaction,
broken down into an itemization of three types of costs:
• Origination charges the consumer will pay to each creditor and loan originator for originating
and extending credit (including separate itemization for points paid to the creditor to reduce
the interest rate as both a percentage of the amount of credit extended and dollar amount) (up
to 13 line items); the following items should be itemized separately in the Origination
Charges subheading:
Compensation paid directly by a consumer to a loan originator that is not also the
o
creditor (Comments 37(f)(1)-2 and -5); or
Any charge imposed to pay for a loan level pricing adjustment assessed on the creditor
o
that is passed on to the consumer as a cost at consummation and not as an adjustment to
the interest rate. (Comment 37(f)(1)-5)
• Services the consumer cannot shop for (items provided by persons other than the creditor or
mortgage broker that the consumer cannot shop for and will pay for at settlement, such as
appraisal fees and credit report fees) (up to 13 line items); and
• Services the consumer can shop for (such as a pest inspection fee, survey fee, or closing
agent fee) (up to 14 line items) (§1026.37(f)(2) and (3)).
Regarding origination fees, only charges paid directly by the consumer to compensate a loan
originator are included in the itemization. Compensation of a loan originator paid indirectly by
the creditor through the interest rate is not itemized (but is itemized on the Closing Disclosure;
see below). (Comment 37(f)(1)-2)
NOTE: Items that are a component of title insurance must include the introductory description of
“Title -.” (§1026.37(f)(2)(i) and (g)(4)(i))
The sum of these amounts must be disclosed as Total Loan Costs. The regulation includes a
required order and terminology for each item. (§1026.37(f)(1)-(5)) If the creditor does not have
enough lines for each subheading, it must disclose the remaining items as an aggregate number.
(§1026.37(f)(6)(i)) An addendum is not permitted for origination charges or charges the
consumer cannot shop for that exceed the maximum number of lines but is permitted for services
the consumer can shop for, provided the creditor appropriately references the addendum
(§1026.37(f)(6)(ii)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 100
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Other Costs table. The Other Costs table captures costs established by government action,
determined by standard calculations applied to ongoing fixed costs, or based on an obligation
incurred by the consumer independently of any requirement imposed by the creditor. (Comment
37(g)-1) The table includes:
• Taxes and other governmental fees (recording fees and other taxes, and transfer taxes paid by
the consumer, separately itemized);
• Prepaids (amounts paid by the consumer before the first scheduled payment, such as
homeowner insurance premiums, mortgage insurance premiums, prepaid interest, and
property taxes, plus up to 3 additional line items);
• Initial escrow payment at closing (items that the consumer will be expected to place into a
reserve or escrow account at consummation to be applied to recurring periodic charges; these
include homeowner’s insurance, mortgage insurance, and property taxes, plus up to 5
additional line items); and
• Other amounts the consumer is likely to pay (such as real estate agent commissions, up to 5
line items). (§1026.37(g)(1)-(4), Comment 37(g)(4)-4)
NOTE: Items that disclose any premiums paid for separate insurance, warranty, guarantee, or
event-coverage products not required by the creditor must include the parenthetical description
(optional) at the end of the label. (§1026.37(g)(4)(ii))
As with Loan Costs, the regulation includes a required order, terminology, and specific
information regarding each Other Costs line item, such as the applicable time period covered by
the amount paid at consummation and the total amount to be paid. Items that disclose any
premiums paid for separate insurance, warranty, guarantee, or event-coverage products not
required by the creditor must include the parenthetical description (optional) at the end of the
label. (§1026.37(g)(4)(ii)) An addendum is not permitted; if the creditor does not have enough
lines for each subheading, it must disclose the remaining items as an aggregate number.
(§1026.37(g)(8)) The sum of these amounts must be disclosed as a line item as Total Other
Costs. (§1026.37(g)(5)) Below this total, the sum of Total Loan Costs and Total Other Costs, less
any lender credits (separately itemized), must be disclosed as a line item as Total Closing Costs.
(§1026.37(g)(6))
Calculating Cash to Close table. The Calculating Cash to Close table shows the consumer how
the amount of cash needed at closing is calculated. (§1026.37(h)(1)) The creditor must itemize
the total amount of cash or other funds that the consumer must provide at consummation. The
itemization includes:
• Total closing costs; (§1026.37(h)(1)(i))
• Closing costs to be financed (i.e., paid out of loan proceeds, disclosed as a negative number);
(§1026.37(h)(1)(ii))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 101
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Down payment and other funds from the borrower (in a purchase transaction, the difference
between purchase price of property and principal amount of loan, disclosed as a positive
number; in other transactions, estimated funds from the consumer—see “funds for the
borrower” below); (§1026.37(h)(1)(iii))
• Deposit (in a purchase transaction, the amount that is paid to the seller or held in trust or
escrow by an attorney or other party under the terms of the agreement for the sale of the
property, disclosed as a negative number, and labeled “deposit;” in all other transactions, the
amount of $0, labeled “deposit”); (§1026.37(h)(1)(iv))
• Funds for the borrower (determined by subtracting the principal amount of the credit
extended from the total amount of existing credit being satisfied, and if the amount is a
positive number, disclosed as that number, but if the amount is $0 or a negative number, it is
disclosed as $0); (§1026.37(h)(1)(v))
• Seller credits (the amount the seller will pay for total loan costs and total other costs, to the
extent known, disclosed as a negative number) (§1026.37(h)(1)(vi); and
• Adjustments and other credits. (§1026.37(h)(1)(vii))
• Estimated Cash to Close is calculated and disclosed in the same table based on these amounts
listed in 12 CFR 1026.37(h)(1)(i) to (vii). (§1026.37(h)(1)(viii))
For transactions without a seller, the creditor can use the optional alternative table and provide,
under the heading Closing Cost Details, the total amount of cash or other funds that must be
provided by the consumer at consummation with an itemization of the following component
amounts: (1026.37(h)(2))
• Loan amount (disclosed under 1026.37(b)(1)); (1026.37(h)(2)(i))
• Total closing costs (disclosed under 1026.37(g)(6); (1026.37(h)(2)(ii))
• Payoffs and payments – the total amount of payoffs and payments to third parties not
otherwise disclosed under 12 CFR 1026.37(f) and (g); (1026.37(h)(2)(iii))
• Cash to or from consumer – the amount of cash or other funds due from or to the consumer
and a statement of whether the disclosed estimated amount is due from or to the consumer,
calculated by the sum of the loan amount, total closing costs and payoffs and payments under
12 CFR 1026.37(h)(2)(i)-(iii)), only to the extent that the sum is greater than zero and less
than the total closing costs (1026.37(g)(6)) and labeled “Cash to Close;” (1026.37(h)(2)(iv))
• Closing costs financed – the sum of the amounts disclosed under 12 CFR 1026.37(h)(2)(i)
and (iii) (loan amount and payoffs and payments), but only to the extent that the sum is
greater than zero and less than the total closing costs (1026.37(g)(6)), labeled “Closing Costs
Financed (Paid from your Loan Amount).” (1026.37(h)(2)(v))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 102
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Adjustable Payment (AP) table.
This table is for transactions with adjustable monthly payments for reasons other than
adjustments to the interest rate, or if the transaction is a seasonal payment product. The table
provides consumers with relevant information about how the monthly payments will change. If
the transaction does not contain such terms, the table may not be on the Loan Estimate
(§1026.37(i); Comment 37(i)-1).
The AP table requires answers to the following questions:
• Whether there are interest only payments, and, if so, the period during which the interest only
payment would apply (§1026.37(i)(1));
• Whether the amount of any periodic payment can be selected by the consumer as an optional
payment and, if so, the period during which the consumer can select optional payments
(§1026.37(i)(2));
• Whether the loan is a step payment product and, if so, the period during which the regular
periodic payments are scheduled to increase (§1026.37(i)(3));
• Whether the loan is a seasonal payment product, and, if so, the period during which the
periodic payments are not scheduled (§1026.37(i)(4)); and
• A subheading of monthly principal and interest payments, with specified information about
the first payment change and amount; frequency of subsequent changes; and maximum
periodic payment that may occur during the loan term (and first date the maximum is
possible) (§1026.37(i)(5).
Adjustable Interest Rate (AIR) table.
For transactions with adjustable interest rates, an Adjustable Interest Rate (AIR) table provides
consumers with relevant information about how the interest rate will change. (§1026.37(j)) The
adjustable interest rate table must be completed if the interest rate may increase after
consummation. However, if the legal obligation does not permit the interest rate to adjust after
consummation, this table is not permitted to appear on the Loan Estimate. (§1026.37(j)(1);
Comment 37(j)-1))
The AIR table includes the following information (§1026.37(j)):
• For non-step-rate products, the index upon which adjustments to the interest rate will be
based and the margin that is added to the index to determine the interest rate
(§1026.37(j)(1));
• For step rate products, the maximum amount of any adjustments to the interest rate that are
scheduled and pre-determined (§1026.37(j)(2));
• The initial interest rate at consummation (§1026.37(j)(3));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 103
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• The minimum/maximum interest rate for the loan, after any introductory period expires
(§1026.37(j)(4));
• The frequency of adjustments (first and subsequent adjustments) (§1026.37(j)(5)); and
• Any limits on interest rate changes (§1026.37(j)(6)).
Page 3: Additional information about the loan
Page 3 of the Loan Estimate contains contact information, a Comparisons table, an Other
Considerations table, and, if desired, a Signature Statement for the consumer to sign to
acknowledge receipt. (See §1026.37(k), (l), (m), and (n))
Contact information
The top of page 3 includes the name and NMLSR or License ID number for the creditor and
mortgage broker, if any; and name and NMLSR or License ID of individual loan officer who is
the primary contact for the consumer, along with that person’s email address and phone number.
(§1026.37(k))
Comparisons table
The Comparisons table follows the contact information and allows consumers to compare loans.
The creditor must provide the:
• Total dollar amount of principal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loan costs scheduled to be
paid through the end of the 60th month after the due date of the first periodic payment;
• Total dollar amount of principal scheduled to be paid through the end of the 60th month after
the due date of the first periodic payment;
• Annual percentage rate using that term and the abbreviation “APR” and expressed as a
percentage; and
• Total interest percentage that the consumer will pay over the life of the loan, expressed as a
percentage of the amount of credit extended, using the term “Total Interest Percentage” and
the abbreviation “TIP.”
Each of these disclosures must be accompanied by a specified descriptive statement. (§1026.37(l))
Other Considerations
Below the Comparisons table is a section regarding “other considerations” about the loan. This
section includes disclosures on appraisals, assumptions, whether homeowner’s insurance is
required, applicable late payment fees, a warning about refinancing, whether the creditor intends
to service the loan or transfer servicing, liability after foreclosure, and an optional statement that
CFPB April 2015 TILA 104
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
a revised Loan Estimate can be provided up to 60 days prior to consummation when the loan is
for new construction. (§1026.37(m))
The consumer is not required to sign the Loan Estimate. If the creditor adds a signature statement
on page 3 of the Loan Estimate to confirm receipt by the consumer, it must use the model form
language. If the creditor chooses not to use the confirm receipt table, it must include a statement
that “You do not have to accept this loan because you have received this form or signed a loan
application.” (§1026.37(n))
Closing Disclosure – Content of Disclosures for Certain
Mortgage Transactions – Section 1026.38
Closing Disclosure form required (§1026.38(t)(3)(i))
The Closing Disclosure generally must contain the actual terms and costs of the transaction and
must satisfy timing and delivery requirements set forth in the rule.
For any loans subject to 12 CFR 1026.19(f) that are federally- related mortgage loans subject to
RESPA (which will include most mortgages), creditors must use form H-25, set forth in Appendix
H. (§1026.38(t)(3)(i) (See also §1024.2(b) for definition of federally related mortgage loan.)
For other loans subject to 12 CFR 1026.19(f) that are not federally related mortgage loans, the
disclosures must contain the exact same information and be made with headings, content, and
format substantially similar to form H-25. (§1026.38(t)(3)(ii))
Information required on the Closing Disclosure. As with the Loan Estimate, most disclosures
on the Closing Disclosure form are required to be labeled using specific nomenclature, headings,
and formatting. Similarly, in some instances, the regulation directs lines on the disclosure to be
left blank where there is no charge or sets forth the maximum number of items that may be
disclosed. See the regulation, Form H-25, and the Regulation Z procedures for specific
obligations regarding each required disclosure.
Rounding. Dollar amounts generally must not be rounded except where noted in the regulation.
(§1026.38(t)(4)(i)) If an amount must be rounded but is composed of other amounts that are not
required or permitted to be rounded, the unrounded amounts should be used to calculate the total,
and the final sum should be rounded. Conversely, if an amount is required to be rounded and is
composed of rounded amounts, the rounded amounts should be used to calculate the total.
(Comment 38(t)(4)-2) Percentage amounts should not be rounded and are disclosed up to two or
three decimals, as needed, except where noted in the regulation. If a percentage amount is a
whole number, only the whole number should be disclosed, with no decimals.
(§1026.38(t)(4)(ii))
Page 1: General information, loan terms, projected payments, and costs at closing
General information, the Loan Terms table, the Projected Payments table, and the Costs at
Closing table are disclosed on the first page of the Closing Disclosure. (§1026.38(a), (b), (c), and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 105
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
(d)) These disclosures mirror the disclosures in the Loan Estimate, and there is a required
statement to compare the document with the Loan Estimate. (§1026.38(a)(2)).
Page 1 of the Closing Disclosure is similar, but not identical, to the Loan Estimate. Page 1 of the
Closing Disclosure provides general closing, transaction, and loan information. It also includes a
Loan Terms table with descriptions of applicable information about the loan, a Projected
Payments table, and a summary Costs at Closing table. (§1026.38(a)-(d))
General information
The top of page 1 of the Closing Disclosure requires the title “Closing Disclosure” and a
specified statement to compare the disclosure with the Loan Estimate. (§1026.38(a)(1) and (2))
The top of page 1 also requires general closing, transaction, and loan information.
Closing information includes the date the Closing Disclosure was delivered to the consumer,
closing date, (i.e., the date of consummation), the disbursement date, settlement agent conducting
the closing, file number assigned by the settlement agent, property address or location, and sale
price (or appraised property value if there is no seller). (§1026.38(a)(3)) For transactions without
a seller for which the creditor has not obtained an appraisal, the creditor may disclose the
estimated value of the property, using the estimate provided by the consumer at application or
the estimate the creditor used to determine approval of the credit transaction. Comment
38(a)(3)(vii)-1
Transaction information includes the borrower’s name and mailing address, the seller’s name
and mailing address, and the name of the creditor making the disclosure. (§1026.38(a)(4))
Loan information includes the loan term, purpose, product, loan type, loan ID number (using the
same number as on the Loan Estimate), and mortgage insurance case number (MIC #), if
required by the creditor. (§1026.38(a)(5)) Other than the MIC #, this information is determined
by the same definitions for those items on the Loan Estimate, updated to reflect the terms of the
legal obligation at consummation. (Comment 38(a)(5)-1)
Loan Terms table
The Loan Terms table is located under the above described general information disclosures. The
information for this table is the same as that required in the Loan Estimate under 12 CFR
1026.37(b), updated to reflect the terms of the legal obligation at consummation. (§1026.38(b))
Projected Payments table
The Projected Payments table is located directly below the Loan Terms table on page 1 of the
Closing Disclosure. The information for this table is generally the same as that required in the
Loan Estimate under 12 CFR 1026.37(c)(1) through (4), updated to reflect the terms of the legal
obligation at consummation (other than the reference to closing cost details required by
§1026.37(c)(4)(vi)). The estimated escrow payments disclosed on the Closing Disclosure for
transactions subject to RESPA are determined under the escrow account analysis described in
CFPB April 2015 TILA 106
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.17. For transactions not subject to RESPA, estimated escrow
payments may be determined under the escrow account analysis described in Regulation X, 12
CFR 1024.17 or in the manner set forth in 12 CFR 1026.37(c)(5). There is also a required
reference to the detailed escrow account disclosures on page 4 of the Closing Disclosure.
(§1026.38(c))
Costs at Closing table
This table, located at the bottom of page 1, provides disclosures on Closing Costs and Cash to
Close. (§1026.38(d)) These disclosures offer the consumer a high-level summary of closing costs
and reference the more detailed itemizations found on pages 2 and 3 of the Closing Disclosure.
(§1026.38(d)(1)(i)(E) and §1026.38(d)(1)(ii)(B))
Items that are disclosed on the Cash at Closing table include Total Closing Costs, as well as the
key inputs making up this total: Loan Costs and Other Costs, less Lender Credits (and the fact
that total closing costs include these amounts). (§1026.38(d)(1)(i)) The table also discloses Cash
Required to Close. (§1026.38(d)(1)(ii)) For transactions without a seller, the creditor must use
the alternative Calculating Cash to Close table when the alternative costs at closing table was
used on the Loan Estimate. (§1026.38(d)(2))
Page 2: Closing Cost Details; Loan costs and other costs
Page 2 of the Closing Disclosure contains an itemization of the “Loan Costs” and “Other Costs”
associated with the loan. (§1026.38(f), (g), and (h)). In each case, the amounts paid by the
consumer, seller, and others are separately disclosed. For items paid by the consumer or seller,
amounts that are paid at closing are disclosed in a column separately from amounts paid before
closing. (§1026.38(f)
The number of items in the Loan Costs and Other Costs tables can be expanded and deleted to
accommodate the disclosure of additional line items and to keep the Loan Costs and Other Costs
tables on page 2 of the Closing Disclosure. (§1026.38(t)(5)(iv)(A); Comment 38(t)(5)(iv)-2)
However, items that are required to be disclosed even if they are not charged to the consumer
(such as Points in the Origination Charges subheading) cannot be deleted. (Comment
38(t)(5)(iv)-1)
Further, the Loan Costs and Other Costs tables can be disclosed on two separate pages of the
Closing Disclosure, but only if the page cannot accommodate all of the costs required to be
disclosed on one page. (§1026.38(t)(5)(iv)(B); Comment 38(t)(5)(iv)-2). When used, these pages
are numbered page 2a and 2b. (Comment 38(t)(5)(iv)-3). For an example of this permissible
change to the Closing Disclosure, see form H-25(H) of appendix H to Regulation Z.
Loan Costs table
All loan costs associated with the transaction are listed in a table under the heading “Loan
Costs,” with the items and amounts listed under four subheadings:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 107
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Origination charges;
• Services borrower did not shop for;
• Services borrower did shop for; and
• Total loan costs. (§1026.38(f)(1)-(5)).
Items should generally be the same as disclosed on the Loan Estimate, updated to reflect the
terms of the legal obligation at consummation, except as discussed below. (§1026.38(f))
Origination Charges. All loan originator compensation is disclosed as an origination
charge, including compensation from the creditor to a third-party loan originator (which was not
disclosed on the Loan Estimate). Compensation from the consumer to a third-party loan
originator is designated as Borrower-Paid at Closing or before closing on the Closing Disclosure.
(§1026.38(f)(1); Comment 38(f)(1)-2) Compensation from the creditor to a third-party loan
originator is designated as Paid by Others on the Closing Disclosure. (Comment 38(f)(1)-2) This
line item must also disclose the name of the loan originator ultimately receiving the payment.
(§1026.38(f)(1)) A designation of “(L)” can be listed with the amount to indicate that the creditor
pays the compensation at consummation. This is the same as the amount of third-party
compensation included in points and fees for purposes of determining the consumer’s ability to
repay the loan. Compensation to individual loan originators is not calculated or disclosed on the
Closing Disclosure. (Comment 38(f)(1)-3)
Services the consumer did or did not shop for. The following are disclosed under
“Services Borrower Did Not Shop For,” regardless of where it was located on the Loan Estimate:
• Items that the consumer could have shopped for, but did not.
• When a consumer chooses a provider that is on the written list of providers for a service on
the Loan Estimate. (§1026.38(f)(2))
Items are re-alphabetized when an item is added to or removed from a particular subheading.
The amounts that are designated as Borrower-Paid at or before closing are subtotaled as Total
Loan Costs (Borrower-Paid). (§1026.38(f)(5)) Amounts designated as Seller-Paid or Paid by
Others are not included in this subtotal (rather, they are included elsewhere in the Closing Cost
Subtotal). (Comment 38(f)(5)-1; §1026.38(h)(2))
Other Costs table
Items should generally be the same as disclosed on the Loan Estimate, updated to reflect the
terms of the legal obligation at consummation, except as discussed below. (§1026.38(g))
Taxes and other government fees. Itemized transfer taxes paid by the consumer and by
the seller are disclosed, instead of just the sum total of transfer taxes to be paid by the consumer
(§1026.38(g)(1)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 108
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Prepaids. An itemization of homeowner’s insurance premiums, mortgage insurance
premiums, prepaid interest, property taxes and a maximum of three additional items (see
1026.37(g)(2)), the name of the person ultimately receiving the payment or government entity
assessing the property tax, and the total of all such itemized amounts that are designated
Borrower-Paid at or before closing. ((§1026.38(g)(2)).
Initial escrow payment at closing. Property taxes paid during different time periods may
be disclosed as separate items. (§1026.38(g)(3))
This section of the table also includes, as the last item disclosed, an Aggregate Adjustment
calculated pursuant to Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.17(d)(2). (§1026.38(g)(3))
Other. This section of the table includes charges for services that are required or obtained
in the real estate closing by the consumer, the seller, or other party, and the name of the person
ultimately receiving the payment, even if not initially disclosed on the Loan Estimate.
(§1026.38(g)(4)) This includes all real estate brokerage fees, homeowner’s or condominium
association charges paid at consummation, home warranties, inspection fees, and other fees that
are part of the real estate closing but not required by the creditor or not disclosed elsewhere on
the Closing Disclosure. (Comment 38(g)(4)-1) The amount of real estate commissions paid must
be the total amount paid to any real estate brokerage as a commission, regardless of the identity
of the party holding any earnest money deposit. (Comment 38(g)(4)-4)
If there are costs that are a component of title insurance services, their label must begin with
“Title -” and, if there are costs designated Borrower-Paid at or before closing for any premiums
paid for separate insurance, warranty, guarantee, or event-coverage products, they must be
labeled “(optional).” (§1026.38(g)(4)(i) and (ii))
The sum of any of these amounts that are Borrower-Paid must be disclosed as a line item as
Total Other Costs (Borrower-Paid). (§1026.38(g)(5)) Below this total, the sum of Total Loan
Costs and Total Other Costs (Borrower-Paid), less any lender credits (separately itemized), must
be disclosed as a line item as Total Closing Costs (Borrower-Paid). (§§1026.38(g) and (h))
Page 3: Calculating cash to close, summaries of transactions, and alternatives for
transactions without a seller
Page 3 of the Closing Disclosure contains the Calculating Cash to Close table and Summaries of
Transactions tables. (§1026.38(i), (j), and (k))
Calculating Cash to Close
The Calculating Cash to Close table permits the consumer to see what costs have changed from
the Loan Estimate. This table contains nine items:
• Total Closing Costs;
• Closing Costs Paid before Closing;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 109
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Closing Costs Financed;
• Down Payment/Funds from Borrower;
• Deposit;
• Funds for Borrower;
• Seller Credits;
• Adjustments and other Credits; and
• Total Cash to Close. (§1026.38(i))
The table has three columns that disclose (1) the amount for each item as it was disclosed on the
Loan Estimate, (2) the final amount for the item, and (3) an answer to the question “Did this
change?” (§1026.38(i)) Generally, the amounts disclosed in the Loan Estimate column will be
the amounts disclosed on the Loan Estimate (or a revised Loan Estimate). (§1026.38(i)(1)(i),
(3)(i), (4)(i), (5)(i), (6)(i), (7)(i), (8)(i), (9)(i))
Funds from the borrower and funds for the borrower are determined by subtracting the principal
amount of the credit extended (excluding the actual amount of the closing costs that are to be
paid out of loan proceeds, if any, stated as a negative number, disclosed pursuant to 12 CFR
1026.38(i)(3)(ii)) from the total amount of all existing debt being satisfied in the real estate
closing and disclosed as the amounts the consumer owes or is reimbursing to the seller under
section 1026.38(j)(1)(v), (except for the amount of debt satisfied and disclosed as other costs in
the closing costs details under section 1026.38(g)). (§§1026.38(i)(6)(iv) and (j)(1)(v)) If this
amount is positive, it is disclosed as $0 under the heading “Funds for Borrower.” If this amount
is a negative number, it is disclosed under the heading “Funds for Borrower” stated as a negative
number, and $0 must be disclosed under “Funds from Borrower.” If the amount is $0, then $0
must be disclosed under both the headings for “Funds from Borrower” and “Funds for
Borrower.” (§1026.38(i)(6)(iv))
When amounts have changed, the disclosure must indicate where the consumer can find the
amounts that have changed on the Loan Estimate. For example, if the Seller Credit amount
changed, the creditor can indicate that the consumer should “See Seller Credits in Section L.”
(Comment 38(i)-3) Other examples of language for these items are found in example form H-
25(B) in appendix H of Regulation Z.
Increases in total closing costs that exceed legal limits. When the increase in Total
Closing Costs exceeds the legal limits on closing costs set forth in 12 CFR 1026.19(e)(3), the
form must disclose a statement that an increase in closing costs exceeds the legal limits by the
dollar amount of the excess in the “Did this change?” column. (§1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(A)(3)) A
statement directing the consumer to the Lender Credit on page 2 must also be included if a credit
to the consumer at closing for the excess amount is provided by the creditor. (Comment
38(i)(1)(iii)(A)-3) The dollar amount must be the sum of all excess amounts, taking into account
CFPB April 2015 TILA 110
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
the different methods of calculating excesses of the limitations on increases in closing costs
under 12 CFR 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii). (§1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(A)(3))
Closing Costs Paid Before Closing. The amount disclosed in the Loan Estimate column
for the “Closing Costs Paid Before Closing” item is $0. (§1026.38(i)(2)(i)) The Final column
should disclose the same amount designated as Borrower-Paid Before Closing in the Closing
Costs Subtotals of the Other Costs table on page 2 of the Closing Disclosure. Under the
subheading “Did this change?” if the amount disclosed here is different from the amount
disclosed in the Loan Estimate, include a statement of that fact; and if it is equal to the amount
disclosed on the Loan Estimate, include a statement of that fact. (§1026.38(i)(2)(iii))
Alternative Calculating Cash to Close table
For transactions without a seller where the alternative Calculating Cash to Close table was used
on the Loan Estimate, the Closing Disclosure must also use the alternative Calculating Cash to
Close table under 12 CFR 1026.38(e). These items include:
• Loan amount;
• Total closing costs;
• Closing costs paid before closing;
• Payoffs and payments;
• Cash to or from consumer; and
• Closing costs financed.
The table has three columns that disclose (1) the amount for each item as it was disclosed on the
Loan Estimate, (2) the final amount for the item, and (3) an answer to the question “Did this
change?” along with a statement of whether the amount increased, decreased or is equal to the
amount disclosed in the Loan Estimate. (§1026.38(e)) Generally, the amounts disclosed in the
Loan Estimate column will be the Loan Amount, Total Closing Costs, Closing Costs Paid before
Closing, and the Total Payoffs and Payments. (§1026.38(e)(1)(i), (2)(i), (3)(i), (4)(i))
Cash to or from the consumer is disclosed in the first two columns of the row labeled Cash to
Close. The first column contains amounts disclosed in the Loan Estimate. The second column
discloses the final amount due from or to the consumer, calculated by the sum of the amounts
disclosed (pursuant to §1026.38(e)(1)(i), (2)(i), (3)(i), (4)(i)) as final Loan Amount, Total
Closing Costs, Closing Costs Paid before Closing, and the Total Payoffs and Payments, disclosed
as a positive number with the statement of whether the funds are due from or to the consumer.
(§1026.38(e)(5))
Closing Costs Financed are disclosed in the third column of the row labeled Cash to Close in the
Calculating Cash to Close table. This amount is calculated by the sum of the final Loan Amount
(§1026.38(e)(1)(ii)) and the final Total Payoffs and Payments (§1026.38(e)(4)(ii)), but only to
CFPB April 2015 TILA 111
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
the extent that the sum is greater than zero and less than or equal to the sum of borrower paid
closing costs (disclosed under §1026.38(h)(2)) designated Borrower-Paid Before Closing .
(§1026.38(e)(6))
Summaries of Transactions table.
The Summaries of Transactions table contains required itemizations of the borrower’s and the
seller’s transactions. (§1026.38(j)-(k)) The table discloses amounts due from or payable to the
consumer and seller at closing, as applicable. (§1026.38(k)(1) and (2)) A separate Closing
Disclosure can be provided to the consumer and the seller that does not reflect the other party’s
costs and credits by omitting specified disclosures on each separate Closing Disclosure.
(§1026.38(t)(5)(v),(vi),(ix))
Additional pages may be attached to the Closing Disclosure to add lines to provide a complete
listing of all items required to be shown on the Closing Disclosure and for customary recitals and
information used locally in real estate closings (for example, breakdown of payoff figures, a
breakdown of the consumer's total monthly mortgage payments, an accounting of debits received
and check disbursements, a statement stating receipt of funds, applicable special stipulations
between consumer and seller, and the date funds are transferred). (Comment 38(j)-6)
Generally, the Summaries of Transactions table is similar to the Summary of Borrower’s
Transaction and Summary of Seller’s Transaction tables on the HUD-1 Settlement Statement
provided under Regulation X prior to the TILA-RESPA integrated disclosure rule taking effect.
There are some modifications to the Closing Disclosure related to the handling of the disclosure
of the consumer’s deposit, the disclosure of credits, and specific guidance on other matters that
may not have been clear in the HUD-1 instructions.
In transactions without a seller, the Seller-Paid column for Closing Costs may be deleted on page
2, and a Payoffs and Payments table may be substituted for the Summaries of Transactions table
and placed before the alternative Calculating Cash to Close table on page 3 of the closing
Disclosure. (§1026.38(t)(5)(vii)(B)). For an example, see page 3 of form H-25(J) of appendix H
to Regulation Z.
Borrower’s Transaction
Amounts due from the borrower. The sale price of the property, sale price of any personal
property included in the sale, and total amount of closing costs designated Borrower-Paid at
Closing. (§1026.38(j)(1)(ii)-(iv)). The contract sale price of the property does not include the
price of tangible personal property if the buyer and seller have agreed to a separate price for such
items. Manufactured homes are not considered personal property for this disclosure. (Comment
38(j)(1)(ii)-1)
Adjustments. This includes additional items that the seller has paid prior to the real estate closing,
but reimbursed by the consumer at closing. These are items such as rent the consumer will
collect after closing, a tenant’s security deposit, or outstanding real estate property taxes where
there is not a corresponding credit in the seller’s transaction. (Comments 38(j)(1)(v)-1 and -2)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 112
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Adjustments for items paid by seller in advance. The prorated amount of prepaid taxes due from
the consumer to reimburse the seller, and the time periods. The taxes are labeled city/town taxes,
county taxes, and/or assessments as appropriate. (§1026.38(j)(1)(vi)-(ix)) If there are additional
items paid by the seller and due from the consumer, they are also itemized. Examples include
taxes paid in advance, flood or insurance premiums if the insurance is under the same policy,
mortgage insurance for assumed loans, condominium assessments, fuel or supplies on hand, and
ground rent paid in advance. (Comment 38(j)(1)(x)-1)
Itemization of amounts already paid by or on behalf of borrower. These amounts are itemized in
the second part of the Summary of Transactions table. These include the following:
• Deposits, and if there is no deposit, this line is left blank. If the deposit was reduced to pay
closing charges prior to closing, the reduction should be shown in the Closing Cost Detail
table designated as Borrower-Paid Before Closing. (Comments 38(j)(2)(ii)-1 and -2)
• The loan amount is the construction or purchase loan amount for a structure or purchase of a
new manufactured home that is real property. For construction loans or loans for
manufactured homes that are real property under state law, the loan amount for the current
transaction must be disclosed, and the sales price of the land and the construction cost or the
price of the manufactured home should be disclosed separately (Comment 38(j)(2)(iii)-1).
• Existing loans assumed or taken subject to are itemized with the outstanding amount of any
loans that the consumer is assuming or taking title subject to. (Comment 38(j)(2)(iv)-1)
• If the seller is providing a lump sum at closing that is not otherwise itemized, to pay for loan
costs and any other obligations of the seller to be paid directly to the consumer, this amount
is labeled Seller Credit. (§1026.38(j)(2)(v)) When the consumer receives a generalized credit
from the seller for closing costs or where the seller (typically a builder) is making an
allowance to the consumer for items to purchase separately, the amount of the credit must be
disclosed. However, if the Seller Credit is attributable to a specific loan cost or other cost
listed in the Closing Cost Details tables, that amount should be reflected in the Seller-Paid
column in the Closing Cost Details tables.
• Any other obligations of the seller to be paid directly to the consumer, such as for issues
identified at a walk-through of the property prior to closing, are disclosed here. (Comments
38(j)(2)(v)-1 and-2)
• Other credits are itemized with a description and the amounts paid by or on behalf of the
consumer, and not otherwise disclosed. Examples of other credits include credits from a real
estate agent, subordinate financing proceeds, satisfaction of existing subordinate liens by
consumer, transferred escrow balances, and gift funds. (Comments 38(j)(2)(vi)-1 to -5)
Adjustments for items unpaid by seller include prorated unpaid taxes due from the seller to
reimburse the consumer at closing, along with the time period and labeled city/town taxes,
county taxes, and/or assessments as appropriate. (§§1026.38(j)(2)(vii)–(x)) If there are additional
items that have not been paid and that the consumer is expected to pay after closing but which
are attributable to the time prior to closing, they are itemized here. (§1026.38(j)(2)(xi)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 113
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Examples include utilities used but not paid for by the seller, rent collected in advance, or
interest on a loan assumption. (Comment 38(j)(2)(xi)-1)
Calculation of the borrower’s transaction is disclosed by including the Total Due from Borrower
at Closing, the amount labeled Total Paid Already by or on Behalf of Borrower at Closing, if
any, disclosed as a negative number, and a statement that the resulting amount is due from or to
the consumer, and labeled Cash to Close. (§1026.38(j)(3))
Items paid outside of closing are costs that are not paid from closing funds but would otherwise
be part of the borrower’s transaction table should be marked as “P.O.C.” for paid outside of
closing. There must also be a statement of the party making the payment, such as the consumer,
seller, loan originator, real estate agent, or any other person. For an example, see form H-25(D)
of appendix H. (Comment 38(j)(4)(i)-1)
Seller’s Transaction
Amounts due to the seller include the sale price of the property, sale price of any personal
property included in the sale, and a description and the amount of other items paid to the seller
by the consumer pursuant to a contract, such as charges that were not disclosed on the Loan
Estimate, or items paid by the seller prior to closing but reimbursed by the consumer at closing.
(§1026.38(k)(1)(ii)-(iv))
Adjustments for items paid by seller in advance include the prorated amount of prepaid taxes due
from the consumer to reimburse the seller, and the time periods. The taxes are labeled city/town
taxes, county taxes, and/or assessments as appropriate. (§1026.38(k)(1)(v)-(viii)) If there are
additional items paid by the seller and due from the consumer, they are also itemized.
(§1026.38(k)(1)(ix))
Itemization of amounts due from seller at closing are itemized in the second part of the Summary
of Transactions table. These include the amount of any deposits disbursed to the seller prior to
closing and seller-paid closing costs. The itemization also includes the amount of any existing
loans that the consumer is assuming and the amounts of any loan secured by a first lien or a
second lien on the property that will be paid off. In addition, the itemization includes seller
credits, an amount that the seller will provide at the closing as a lump sum, not otherwise
itemized, to pay for loan costs and other costs and any other obligations of the seller to be paid
directly to the consumer. The amounts and a description of any and all other obligations required
to be paid by the seller at closing are disclosed, including any lien-related payoffs, fees, or
obligations. (§§1026.38(k)(2)(ii)–(vii))
Adjustments for items unpaid by seller include prorated unpaid taxes due from the seller to
reimburse the consumer at closing, along with the time period and labeled city/town taxes,
county taxes, and/or assessments as appropriate. (§§1026.38(k)(2)(x)–(xii)) If there are
additional items that have not been paid and that the consumer is expected to pay after closing
but which are attributable to the time prior to closing, they are itemized here.
(§1026.38(k)(2)(xiii))
Calculation of the seller’s transaction is disclosed by including the Total Due to Seller at
Closing, the amount labeled Total Due from Seller at Closing, if any, disclosed as a negative
CFPB April 2015 TILA 114
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
number, and a statement that the resulting amount is due from or to the seller, and labeled Cash.
(§1026.38(k)(3))
Items paid outside of closing are costs that are not paid from closing funds but that would
otherwise be part of the seller’s transaction table should be marked as “P.O.C.” for paid outside
of closing. There must also be a statement of the party making the payment. (§1026.38(k)(4))
Page 4: Additional information about this loan
Page 4 of the Closing Disclosure groups several required loan disclosures together, generally
using specified language, including:
• Information concerning future assumption of the loan by a subsequent purchaser required by
12 CFR 1026.37(m)(2); (§1026.38(l)(1))
• Whether the legal obligation contains a demand feature that can require early payment of the
loan; (§1026.38(l)(2))
• The terms of the legal obligation that impose a fee for a late payment, including the amount
of time that passes before a fee is imposed and the amount of such fee or how it is calculated
(as required by 12 CFR 1026.37(m)(4)); (§1026.38(l)(3))
• Whether the regular periodic payments can cause the principal balance of the loan to increase
(i.e., whether there could be negative amortization); (§1026.38(l)(4))
• The creditor’s policy regarding partial payments by the consumer; (§1026.38(l)(5))
• A statement that the consumer is granting a security interest in the property (along with an
identification of the property); (§1026.38(l)(6)) and
• Specified information related to any escrow account held by the servicer, including specified
estimated escrow costs over the first year after consummation (or a statement that an escrow
account has not been established, with a description of specified estimated property costs
during the first year after consummation). (§1026.38(l)(7))
If the periodic principal and interest payment may change after consummation, other than due to
a change in interest rate or where the loan is a seasonal payment product, page 4 of the Closing
Disclosure must also include an Adjustable Payment (AP) table. (§1026.38(m)) If the loan’s
interest rate may increase after consummation, page 4 of the Closing Disclosure must also
include the Adjustable Interest Rate (AIR) table. (§1026.38(n)) These are the tables required in
the Loan Estimate at 12 CFR 1026.37(i) and (j), respectively, updated to reflect the terms of the
loan at consummation.
Page 5: Loan calculations, other disclosures, and contact information
Page 5 of the Closing Disclosure discloses a Loan Calculations table, as well as specified other
disclosures, contact information for the CFPB for questions, and contact information for
CFPB April 2015 TILA 115
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
participants in the transaction, and if desired by the creditor, a signature table to confirm receipt
of the Closing Disclosure. (§1026.38(o)-(s))
Loan Calculations table
The Loan Calculations table discloses:
• Total of Payments (total paid after all scheduled payments of principal, interest, mortgage
insurance, and loan costs are made);
• Finance Charge;
• Amount Financed;
• Annual Percentage Rate (APR); and;
• Total Interest Percentage (TIP) (the total amount of interest paid over the loan term as a
percentage of the loan amount). (§1026.38(o))
The APR and TIP amounts should be updated from the amounts disclosed on the Loan Estimate
to reflect the terms of the legal obligation at consummation.
Other Disclosures table
The Other Disclosures table requires a notice regarding the lender’s obligation to provide a free
copy of the appraisal (for higher-priced mortgage loans under 12 CFR 1026.35 and loans
covered by the Equal Credit Opportunity Act); a specified warning about consequences of
nonpayment under the contract, whether state law provides for continued consumer liability after
foreclosure, a statement concerning the consumer’s ability to refinance the loan, and a statement
concerning the extent that the interest on the loan can be included as a tax deduction by the
consumer. (§1026.38(p))
Contact information table
For each of the lender, mortgage broker, real estate broker (buyer and seller), and settlement
agent, the contact information table discloses the name, address, NMLS or state license ID (as
applicable), contact name of an individual primary contact for the consumer (and NMLSR ID or
license ID for that person), email, and phone number. (§1026.38(r))
Notification of Sale or Transfer of Mortgage Loans
– Section 1026.39
Notice of new owner – No later than 30 calendar days after the date on which a mortgage
loan is acquired by or otherwise sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred25 to a third party, the
25 The date of transfer to the covered person may, at the covered person’s option, be either the date of acquisition recognized in
the books and records of the acquiring party or the date of transfer recognized in the books and records of the transferring party.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 116
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
“covered person”26 shall notify the consumer clearly and conspicuously in writing, in a form that
the consumer may keep, of such transfer and include:
• Identification of the loan that was sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred;
• Name, address, and telephone number of the covered person;
• Date of transfer;
• Name, address, and telephone number of an agent or party having authority, on behalf of the
covered person, to receive notice of the right to rescind and resolve issues concerning the
consumer’s payments on the mortgage loan;
• Location where transfer of ownership of the debt to the covered person is or may be recorded
in public records or, alternatively, that the transfer of ownership has not been recorded in
public records at the time the disclosure is provided; and
• At the option of the covered person, any other information regarding the transaction.
This notice of sale or transfer must be provided for any consumer credit transaction that is
secured by the principal dwelling of a consumer, as well as a closed-end consumer credit
transaction secured by a dwelling or real property. Thus, it applies to both closed-end mortgage
loans and open-end home equity lines of credit. This notification is required of the covered
person even if the loan servicer remains the same.
Regulation Z also establishes special rules regarding the delivery of the notice when there is
more than one covered person. In a joint acquisition of a loan, the covered persons must provide
a single disclosure that lists the contact information for all covered persons. However, if one of
the covered persons is authorized to receive a notice of rescission and to resolve issues
concerning the consumer’s payments, the disclosure may state contact information only for that
covered person. In addition, if the multiple covered persons each acquire a partial interest in the
loan pursuant to separate and unrelated agreements, they may provide either a single notice or
separate notices. Finally, if a covered person acquires a loan and subsequently transfers it to
another covered person, a single notice may be provided on behalf of both of them, as long as the
notice satisfies the timing and content requirements with respect to each of them.
In addition, there are three exceptions to the notice requirement to provide the notice of sale or
transfer:
26 A “covered person” means any person, as defined in 12 CFR 1026.2(a)(22), that becomes the owner of an existing mortgage
loan by acquiring legal title to the debt obligation, whether through a purchase, assignment, or other transfer, and who acquires
more than one mortgage loan in any 12-month period. For purposes of this section, a servicer of a mortgage loan shall not be
treated as the owner of the obligation if the servicer holds title to the loan or it is assigned to the servicer solely for the
administrative convenience of the servicer in servicing the obligation. See 12 CFR 1026.39(a)(1).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 117
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• The covered person sells, assigns, or otherwise transfers legal title to the mortgage loan on or
before the 30th calendar day following the date of transfer on which it acquired the mortgage
loan;
• The mortgage loan is transferred to the covered person in connection with a repurchase
agreement that obligates the transferring party to repurchase the mortgage loan (unless the
transferring party does not repurchase the mortgage loan); or
• The covered person acquires only a partial interest in the mortgage loan and the agent or
party authorized to receive the consumer’s rescission notice and resolve issues concerning
the consumer’s payments on the mortgage loan does not change as a result of that transfer.
Mortgage transfer notices – partial payment policies. If a creditor or servicer is
required by Regulation Z to provide mortgage transfer notices when the ownership of a mortgage
loan is being transferred, the notice must include information related to the partial payment
policy that will apply to the mortgage loan. This post-consummation partial payment disclosure
is required for a closed-end consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling or real property,
other than a reverse mortgage. (§1026.39(a) and (d))
The partial payment disclosure must include: (§1026.39(d)(5))
• The heading “Partial Payment” over all of the following additional information:
If periodic payments that are less than the full amount due are accepted, a statement that
o
the covered person, using the term “lender,” may accept partial payments and apply such
payments to the consumer’s loan;
If periodic payments that are less than the full amount due are accepted but not applied to
o
a consumer’s loan until the consumer pays the remainder of the full amount due, a
statement that the covered person, using the term “lender,” may hold partial payments in
a separate account until the consumer pays the remainder of the payment and then apply
the full periodic payment to the consumer’s loan;
If periodic payments that are less than the full amount due are not accepted, a statement
o
that the covered person, using the term “lender,” does not accept any partial payments;
and
A statement that, if the loan is sold, the new covered person, using the term “lender,” may
o
have a different policy.
The text illustrating the disclosure in form H-25 may be modified to suit the format of the
mortgage transfer notice. (Comment 39(d)(5)-1)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 118
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Periodic Statements for Residential Mortgage Loans
– Section 1026.41
Creditors, assignees, or servicers27 of closed-end mortgages are generally required to provide
consumers with periodic statements for each billing cycle unless the loan is a fixed rate loan and
the servicer provides the consumer with a coupon book meeting certain conditions. Periodic
statements must be provided by the servicer within a reasonably prompt time after the payment is
due, or at the end of any courtesy period provided by the servicer for the previous billing cycle.
Delivering, emailing or placing the periodic statements in the mail within four days of the close
of the courtesy period of the previous billing cycle is generally acceptable. However, periodic
statements are not required for:
• Reverse mortgage transactions covered under section 1026.33;
• Mortgage loans secured by a consumer’s interest in a timeshare plan;
• Fixed-rate loans where the servicer currently provides consumers with coupon books that
contain certain specified account information, contact information for the servicer,
delinquency information (if applicable), and information that consumers can use to obtain
more information about their account; and
• Creditors, assignees, or servicers that meet the “small servicer” exemption.
NOTE: Sections 1026.41(e)(4)(ii) and (iii) define a “small servicer” and provide clarification
how a small servicer will be determined. A small servicer is a servicer that: (1) services,
together with any affiliates, 5,000 or fewer mortgage loans, for all of which it or an affiliate
is the creditor or assignee, (2) meets the definition of a Housing Finance Agency under 24
CFR 266.5, or (3) is a nonprofit entity (defined in §1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C)(1)) that services
5,000 or fewer mortgage loans, including any mortgage loans serviced on behalf of
associated nonprofit entities (defined in §1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C)(2)), for all of which the
servicer or an associated nonprofit entity is the creditor. To determine whether a servicer is a
small servicer, generally, a servicer should be evaluated based on the mortgage loans
serviced by the servicer and any affiliate as of January 1 for the remainder of the calendar
year. However, to determine small servicer status under the nonprofit small servicer
definition, a nonprofit servicer should be evaluated based on the mortgage loans serviced by
the servicer (and not those serviced by associated nonprofit entities) as of January 1 for the
remainder of the calendar year. A servicer that ceases to qualify as a small servicer has the
later of six months from the time it ceases to qualify or until the next January 1 to come into
compliance with the requirements of section 1026.41. The following mortgage loans are not
27
Creditors, assignees, and servicers are all subject to the requirements of section 1026.41, as applicable. Creditors, assignees, or
servicers may decide among themselves which of them will provide the required disclosures. However, establishing a business
relationship where one party agrees to provide disclosures on behalf of the other parties does not absolve all other parties from
their legal obligations. However, a creditor or assignee that currently does not own the mortgage loan or mortgage servicing
rights is not subject to the periodic statement requirement.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 119
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
considered in determining whether the servicer qualifies as a small servicer: mortgage loans
voluntarily serviced by the servicer for a creditor or assignee that is not an affiliate of the
servicer and for which the servicer does not receive any compensation or fees; reverse
mortgage transactions, and mortgage loans secured by consumers’ interests in timeshare
plans.
•A servicer is exempt from the periodic statement requirements for a mortgage loan while the
consumer is a debtor in bankruptcy under Title 11 of the United States Code.
Servicers must provide consumers with the following information in the specified format on the
periodic statements:
The Amount Due
• The payment due date, the amount of any late payment fee, the date that late payment fees
will be assessed to the consumer’s account if timely payment is not made, and the amount
due, which must be shown more prominently than other disclosures on the page;
NOTE: If the transaction has multiple payment options, the amount due under each of the
payment options must be provided.
• An explanation of the amount due, including the monthly payment amount with a breakdown
of how much will be applied to principal, interest, and escrow, the total sum of any
fees/charges imposed since the last statement, and any payment amount past due. Mortgage
loans with multiple payment options must also have a breakdown of each payment option,
along with information regarding how each payment option will impact the principal;
Past Payment Breakdown
• The total of all payments received since the last statement and the total of all payments
received since the start of the calendar year, including, for each payment, a breakdown of
how the payment(s) was applied to principal, interest, escrow, and/or fees and charges, and
any amount held in a suspense or unapplied funds account (if applicable);
Transaction Activity
• A list of transaction activity (including dates, a brief description, and amount) for the current
billing cycle, including any credits or debits that affect the current amount due, with the date,
amount, and brief description of each transaction;
Partial Payment Information
• If a statement reflects a past partial payment held in a suspense or unapplied funds account,
information explaining what the consumer must do to have the payment applied to the
mortgage. Information must be on the front page or a separate page of the statement or
separate letter;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 120
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Contact Information
• Contact information for the servicer, including a toll-free telephone number and email
address (if applicable) that the consumer may use to obtain information regarding the
account. Contact information must be on the front page of the statement; and
Account Information
• Account information, including the outstanding principal balance, the current interest rate,
the date after which the interest rate may change if the loan is an ARM, and any prepayment
penalty, as well as the web address for CFPB’s or HUD’s list of homeownership counselors
or counseling organizations and the HUD toll-free telephone number to contact the
counselors or counseling organizations.
Servicers must provide consumers that are more than 45 days delinquent on past payments
additional information regarding their accounts on their periodic statements. These items must be
grouped together in close proximity to each other and must include:
• The date on which the consumer became delinquent;
• A notification of the possible risks of being delinquent, such as foreclosure and related
expenses;
• An account history for either the previous six months or the period since the last time the
account was current (whichever is shorter), which details the amount past due from each
billing cycle and the date on which payments were credited to the account as fully paid;
• A notice stating any loss mitigation program that the consumer has agreed to (if applicable);
• A notice stating whether the servicer has initiated a foreclosure process;
• Total payments necessary to bring the account current; and
• A reference to homeownership counseling information (see Account Information above).
The regulation does not prohibit adding to the required disclosures, as long as the additional
information does not overwhelm or obscure the required disclosures. For example, while certain
information about the escrow account (such as the account balance) is not required on the
periodic statement, this information may be included.
The periodic statement may be provided electronically if the consumer agrees. The consumer
must give affirmative consent to receive statements electronically.
For sample periodic statements, see Appendix H-30.
Valuation Independence – Section 1026.42
Regulation Z seeks to ensure that real estate appraisers, and others preparing valuations, are free
to use their independent professional judgment in assigning home values without influence or
CFPB April 2015 TILA 121
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
pressure from those with interests in the transactions. Regulation Z also seeks to ensure that
appraisers receive customary and reasonable payments for their services. Regulation Z’s
valuation rules apply to creditors and settlement services providers for consumer credit
transactions secured by the consumer’s principal dwelling (“covered transaction”) and includes
several provisions that protect the integrity of the appraisal process when a consumer’s principal
dwelling is securing the loan. In general, the rule prohibits “covered persons” from engaging in
coercion, bribery, and other similar actions designed to cause anyone who prepares a valuation to
base the value of the property on factors other than the person’s independent judgment.28 More
specifically, Regulation Z:
• Prohibits coercion and other similar actions designed to cause appraisers to base the
appraised value of properties on factors other than their independent judgment;
• Prohibits appraisers and appraisal management companies hired by lenders from having
financial or other interests in the properties or the credit transactions;
• Prohibits creditors from extending credit based on appraisals if they know beforehand of
violations involving appraiser coercion or conflicts of interest, unless the creditors determine
that the values of the properties are not materially misstated;
• Prohibits a person that prepares a valuation from materially misrepresenting the value of the
consumer’s principal dwelling, and prohibits a covered person other than the person that
prepares valuations from materially altering a valuation. A misrepresentation or alteration is
material if it is likely to significantly affect the value assigned to the consumer’s principal
dwelling;
• Prohibits any covered person from falsifying a valuation or inducing a misrepresentation,
falsification, or alteration of value;
• Requires that creditors or settlement service providers that have information about appraiser
misconduct file reports with the appropriate state licensing authorities if the misconduct is
material (i.e., likely to significantly affect the value assigned to the consumer’s principal
dwelling; and
• Requires the payment of reasonable and customary compensation to appraisers who are not
employees of the creditors or of the appraisal management companies hired by the creditors.
28 This section applies to any consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling. A “covered person” means a creditor with
respect to a covered transaction. A “covered transaction” means an extension of consumer credit that is or will be secured by a
dwelling, as defined in 12 CFR 1026.2(a)(19).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 122
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Minimum Standards for Transactions Secured by a
Dwelling (Ability to Repay and Qualified Mortgages)
– Section 1026.43
Minimum standards for transactions secured by a dwelling
– Sections 1026.43(a), (g), (h)
Creditors originating certain mortgage loans are required to make a reasonable and good faith
determination at or before consummation that a consumer will have the ability to repay the loan.
The ability-to-repay requirement applies to most closed-end mortgage loans; however, there are
some exclusions, including:
• Home equity lines of credit;29
• Mortgages secured by an interest in a timeshare plan;
• Reverse mortgages;
• A temporary bridge loan with a term of 12 months or less, such as a loan to finance the
purchase of a new dwelling where the consumer plans to sell a current dwelling within
12 months or a loan to finance the initial construction of a dwelling;
• A construction phase of 12 months or less of a construction-to-permanent loan; and
• An extension of credit made pursuant to a program authorized by sections 101 and 109 of the
Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008 (12 U.S.C. 5211; 5219).
NOTE: There are additional exclusions under 1026.43(a) that generally include extensions of
credit by various state or federal government agencies or programs or by creditors with specific
designations under such programs or extensions of credit that meet certain criteria and are
extended by certain creditors that the IRS has determined are 501(c)(3) non-profits. For a full list
and criteria, please see 12 CFR 1026.43(a)(3)(iv)–(vii).
Generally, loans covered under this section (which, for purposes of the prepayment penalty
provisions in section 1026.43(g), includes reverse mortgages and temporary loans otherwise
excluded30 from the ability-to-repay provisions) may not have prepayment penalties; however,
there are exceptions for certain fixed-rate and step-rate qualified mortgages that are not higher-
priced mortgage loans (as defined in section 1026.35(a)), and only if otherwise permitted by law.
For such mortgages, the prepayment penalties must be limited to the first three years of the loan
29
For open-end credit transactions that are high-cost mortgages as defined in 12 CFR 1026.32, creditors are required to
determine a borrower’s ability to repay under section 1026.34.
30
These include a temporary or “bridge” loan with a term of 12 months or less; a construction phase of 12 months or less of a
construction-to-permanent loan; or an extension of credit made pursuant to a program administered by a housing finance agency;
by certain community development or non-profit lenders, as specified in section 1026.43(a)(3)(v); or in connection with certain
federal emergency economic stabilization programs. 12 CFR §1026.43(a)(3)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 123
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
and may not exceed two percent for the first two years and one percent for the third year. The
creditor must offer the consumer an alternative loan without such penalties that the creditor has a
good faith belief that the consumer likely qualifies for, with the same term, a fixed rate or step
rate, substantially equal payments, and limited points and fees (see §1026.43(g)).
Ability to Repay – Section 1026.43(c)
Except as provided under section 1026.43(d) (refinancing of non-standard mortgages), (e)
(qualified mortgages), and (f) (balloon payment qualified mortgages by certain creditors),
creditors must consider the following eight underwriting factors when making a determination of
the consumer’s ability to repay:
• The consumer’s current or reasonably expected income or assets (excluding the value of the
dwelling and any attached real property);
• The consumer’s current employment status if the creditor relies on the consumer’s income in
determining repayment ability;
• The consumer’s monthly payment for the mortgage loan;
• The consumer’s monthly payment on any simultaneous loan (i.e., a covered transaction or
HELOC that is being consummated generally at the same or similar time) secured by the
same dwelling that the creditor knows or has reason to know will be made, calculated in
accordance with section 1026.43(c)(6);
• The consumer’s monthly payment for mortgage-related obligations, including property taxes;
• The consumer’s current debt obligations, alimony, and child support;
• The consumer’s monthly debt-to-income ratio or residual income, calculated in accordance
with section 1026.43(c)(7); and
• The consumer’s credit history.
Creditors are required to verify this information using reasonably reliable third-party records,
with specific rules for verification of income or assets and employment status. In the case of the
consumer’s income or assets, the creditor must use third-party records that provide reasonably
reliable evidence of such income or assets. Creditors may verify the information considered
using the consumer’s income tax return transcripts issued by the IRS, copies of tax returns filed
by the consumer, W-2s or similar documentation, payroll statements, financial institution
records, receipts from check-cashing or fund transfer services, and records from the consumer’s
employer or other specified records. (§1026.43(c)(4))
Regulation Z also provides rules for how creditors must apply certain underwriting factors when
determining whether a consumer has the ability to repay the mortgage. For example, creditors
must calculate the monthly payment for the covered transaction using the greater of the fully
indexed rate or any introductory interest rate, and the monthly, fully amortizing payments that
CFPB April 2015 TILA 124
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
are substantially equal during the loan term. However, special rules apply to mortgages with a
balloon payment, interest-only loans, and negative amortization loans due to the unique
characteristics of the mortgage. (§1026.43(c)(5))
Finally, creditors may not evade the ability-to-repay requirements by structuring a closed-end
loan secured by a dwelling as open-end credit that does not meet the definition of open-end
credit plan.
Exemption from ATR Requirements for Refinancing of Non-
Standard Mortgages – Section 1026.43(d)
Section 1026.43(d) provides special rules for refinancing a “non-standard mortgage” into a
“standard mortgage.”
A “non-standard mortgage” is a covered transaction31 as defined under section 1026.43(a) that is:
• An adjustable rate mortgage with an introductory fixed interest rate for a period of one year
or longer;
• An interest-only loan; or
• A negative amortization loan.
A “standard mortgage” is a covered transaction as defined under section 1026.43(a) with:
• Periodic payments that do not cause the principal balance to increase, do not allow the
consumer to defer repayment of the principal, or do not result in balloon payments;
• Total points and fees that are not more than those allowed in section 1026.43(e)(3);
• A term that does not exceed 40 years;
• An interest rate that is fixed for the first five years of the loan; and
• Proceeds that are used solely to pay off the outstanding principal on the non-standard
mortgage and closing or settlement costs (that are required to be disclosed under RESPA).
Current holders of non-standard mortgages or their servicers (collectively referred to here as
“holders”) can refinance non-standard mortgages into standard mortgages without considering a
consumer’s ability to repay under section 1026.43(c), if certain conditions are met.
31
A covered transaction is a consumer credit transaction that is secured by a dwelling, including any real property attached to the
dwelling. A covered transaction is not a home equity line of credit under section 1026.40; a mortgage secured by a consumer’s
interest in a timeshare plan; a reverse mortgage under section 1026.33; a temporary or “bridge” loan with a term of 12 months or
less; a construction phase of 12 months or less of a construction-to-permanent loan; or an extension of credit made: pursuant to a
program administered by a housing finance agency; by certain community development or non-profit lenders, as specified in
section 1026.43(a)(3)(v); or in connection with certain federal emergency economic stabilization programs.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 125
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
To qualify for the exemption from the ability-to-repay requirements, the standard mortgage must
have:
• A monthly payment that is “materially lower”32 than the non-standard mortgage,
• The creditor must receive a written application from the consumer for the standard mortgage
no later than two months after the non-standard mortgage is recast, and
• On the non-standard mortgage, consumers must have made no more than one payment more
than 30 days late during the preceding 12 months and must have made no late payments more
than 30 days late in the preceding six months of the holder receiving the application for a
standard mortgage.
For non-standard loans consummated on or after January 10, 2014, that are refinanced into
standard mortgages, the exemption from the ability-to-repay requirements for the refinancing is
available only if the non-standard mortgage met the repayment ability requirements under section
1026.43(c) or the qualified mortgage requirements under section 1026.43(e) as applicable.
If these conditions are satisfied and if the holder has considered whether the standard mortgage is
likely to prevent the consumer from defaulting on the non-standard mortgage once the loan terms
are recast, the holder is not required to meet the ability-to-repay requirements in section
1026.43(c). Finally, holders refinancing a non-standard mortgage to a standard mortgage may
offer consumers rate discounts and terms that are the same as (or better than) rate discounts and
terms that the holder offers to new consumers, consistent with the holder’s documented
underwriting practices and to the extent not prohibited by applicable laws. For example, a holder
would comply with this requirement if it has documented underwriting practices that provide for
offering rate discounts to consumers with credit scores above a certain threshold, even though
the consumer would not normally qualify for that discounted rate.
Qualified Mortgages: Rebuttable Presumption and Safe Harbor
– Section 1026.43(e)
The rule provides a presumption of compliance with the ability-to-repay requirements for
creditors that originate certain types of loans called “qualified mortgages.” There are several
categories of qualified mortgages, which are discussed below. Qualified mortgages afford
creditors and assignees greater protection against liability under the ability-to-repay provisions.
32
When comparing the payments, the holder must calculate the payment for the standard mortgage based on substantially equal,
monthly, fully amortizing payments based on the maximum interest rate that may apply in the first five years. The holder must
calculate the non-standard mortgage payment based on substantially equal, monthly, fully amortizing payments of principal and
interest using:
• The fully indexed rate as of a reasonable period of time before or after the date on which the creditor receives the consumer’s
application for the standard mortgage;
• The term of the loan remaining as of the date on which the recast occurs, assuming all scheduled payments have been made up
to the recast date and the payment due on the recast date is made and credited as of that date; and
• The remaining loan amount, which is calculated differently depending on whether the loan is an adjustable rate mortgage,
interest-only loan, or negative amortization loan.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 126
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Qualified mortgages that are not higher-priced covered transactions receive a safe harbor under
the ability-to-repay provisions, which means the presumption of compliance cannot be rebutted.
A qualified mortgage is higher priced if the loan’s APR exceeds the APOR by 1.5 percentage
points or more for first-lien loans that either fall within the general qualified mortgage definition
or the temporary qualified mortgage definition for loans that are eligible to be purchased,
guaranteed or insured by GSEs or federal agencies, and 3.5 percentage points for first-lien loans
that fall within the small creditor balloon payment, temporary small creditor balloon payment, or
small creditor portfolio qualified mortgage definitions, or for second-lien loans.
Generally, the safe harbor provides a conclusive presumption that the creditor made a good faith
and reasonable determination of the consumer’s ability to repay. Qualified mortgages that are
higher priced receive a rebuttable presumption of compliance rather than a safe harbor with the
ability-to-repay provisions. This means that the loan is presumed to comply with the ability-to-
repay provisions, but, for example, the consumer would have the opportunity to rebut that
presumption in future ability-to-repay litigation.
For a qualified mortgage that is a higher-priced covered transaction, the presumption of
compliance is rebuttable by showing that at consummation, the consumer’s income, debt
obligations, alimony, child support, and monthly payments on the loan and mortgage-related
obligations and simultaneous loans of which the creditor was aware at consummation would
leave the consumer with insufficient residual income or assets (other than the value of the
dwelling and real property) to meet living expenses (including recurring and material non-debt
obligations that the creditor was aware of at consummation).
Requirements for Qualified Mortgages - Generally – Section 1026.43(e)(2)
and (3)
Loans that are qualified mortgages under the general definition may not have negative
amortization, interest-only payments, balloon payments, or terms exceeding 30 years. A
qualified mortgage for loans greater than or equal to $100,000 may not have points and fees paid
by the consumer that exceed three percent of the total loan amount (although certain “bona fide
discount points” are excluded for certain loans with pricing within prescribed ranges of APOR—
the average prime offer rate). The rule provides guidance on calculating points and fees and
thresholds for smaller loans.33
The rule also provides a period of time for a creditor or assignee to review a transaction’s points
and fees and, if points and fees exceed the applicable threshold, to pay the consumer the excess
points and fees, along with interest on the excess points and fees (calculated using the contract
interest rate). This cure is generally allowed within 210 days after consummation unless the
consumer has instituted an action in connection with the loan, or notified the creditor, assignee,
or servicer in writing that the points and fees exceed the applicable threshold, or the consumer is
60 days past due. To be eligible for a points and fees cure, the loan must meet all other
33
The definition and calculation rules for points and fees are the same as those used to determine whether a closed-end mortgage
is a HOEPA loan, discussed above at section 1026.32(b)(2)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 127
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
applicable requirements to be a qualified mortgage and the creditor or assignee, as applicable,
must maintain and follow policies and procedures for post-consummation review of points and
fees and for making cure payments to consumers. This cure provision applies to the points and
fees limits for all of the qualified mortgage types defined in Regulation Z.
The rule also provides underwriting criteria for qualified mortgages. Generally, the rule requires
that monthly payments be calculated based on the highest payment that will apply in the first five
years of the loan after the date on which the first periodic payment is due and that the consumer
have a total (or “back-end”) debt-to-income ratio that is less than or equal to 43 percent.
Appendix Q, drawing upon Federal Housing Administration guidelines, details the calculation of
debt-to-income for these purposes. The rule also requires that the creditor consider and verify the
consumer’s current or reasonably expected income or assets and current debt obligations,
alimony and child support, also in accordance with Appendix Q.
Temporary Category of Qualified Mortgages – Section 1026.43(e)(4)
Regulation Z provides a temporary category of qualified mortgages that—except with regard to
matters that are wholly unrelated to ability to repay—satisfy the underwriting requirements of,
and are therefore eligible to be purchased, guaranteed or insured by, either (1) the Government
Sponsored Enterprises (Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac) while they operate under federal
conservatorship or receivership; or (2) the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development,
the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, or the Rural
Housing Service. This temporary provision will phase out over time as the various federal
agencies issue their own qualified mortgage rules34 or if GSE conservatorship ends, and in any
event after seven years (January 10, 2021). These mortgages must satisfy certain requirements
applicable to qualified mortgages, including prohibitions on negative-amortization, interest-only,
and balloon payment features; maximum loan terms of 30 years; and points-and-fees restrictions.
However, the flat 43 percent debt-to-income threshold for qualified mortgages does not apply.
Qualified Mortgage – Small Creditor Portfolio Loans
– Section 1026.43(e)(5)
Mortgages that are originated and held in portfolio by certain small creditors are also qualified
mortgages if they meet certain requirements.
These mortgages must generally satisfy the requirements applicable to qualified mortgages,
including prohibitions on negative-amortization, balloon-payment, and interest-only features;
maximum loan terms of 30 years; and points-and-fees restrictions. However, while the creditor
must consider and verify the consumer’s current or reasonably expected income or assets and
current debt obligations, alimony, and child support, it may do so without regard to the standards
in Appendix Q. In addition, debt-to-income ratios must be considered and verified, but the 43
percent threshold for qualified mortgages under the general definition does not apply.
34
This temporary QM rule does not apply to HUD loans or to VA loans because HUD issued its final QM rule, effective January
10, 2014 (78 Fed. Reg. 75215, December 11, 2013), and VA issued its interim final QM rule, effective May 9, 2014 (79 Fed.
Reg. 26620, May 9, 2014).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 128
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
A small creditor that satisfies the exemption criteria in section 1026.35(b)(2)(iii)(B) and (C) is
eligible to make small creditor portfolio qualified mortgages. (In contrast to section 1026.43(f),
below, eligibility for this qualified mortgage category is not conditioned on the small creditor
operating predominantly in a rural or underserved area). For a period of three years after
consummation, the creditor may not transfer the loan, or the loan will lose its status as a qualified
mortgage. The qualified mortgage status continues under section 1026.43(e)(5)(ii), however, if
the creditor transfers the loan to another creditor that meets the requirements to be a small lender,
or when the loan is transferred due to a capital restoration plan, bankruptcy, or state or federal
governmental agency order, or if the mortgage is transferred pursuant to a merger or acquisition
of the creditor. A qualified mortgage can be transferred after three years without losing its status.
Small Creditor Rural or Underserved Balloon-Payment Qualified Mortgages
and Temporary Balloon-Payment Qualified Mortgages
– Sections 1026.43(f) and 1026.43(e)(6)
Balloon-payment mortgages are qualified mortgages if they are originated and held in portfolio
by small creditors operating predominantly in rural or underserved areas and meet certain other
requirements. These mortgages must satisfy certain requirements applicable to qualified
mortgages, including prohibitions on negative-amortization and interest-only features; maximum
loan terms of 30 years; and points-and-fees restrictions. These loans must have a term of at least
five years, a fixed interest rate, and meet certain basic underwriting standards; debt-to-income
ratios must be considered and verified, but the 43 percent threshold for qualified mortgages
under the general definition does not apply. The rule also requires that the creditor consider and
verify the consumer’s current or reasonably expected income or assets and current debt
obligations, alimony, and child support, but without regard to the standards in Appendix Q. This
category of qualified mortgage is not available for a loan that, at origination, is subject to a
forward commitment to be acquired by a person that does not itself qualify for the category
(under the requirements outlined in the next paragraph).
A small creditor that satisfies the exemption criteria in section 1026.35(b)(2)(iii)(A), (B), and (C)
(higher-priced mortgage escrow requirements) is eligible to make rural or underserved balloon-
payment qualified mortgages. For a period of three years after consummation, the creditor may
not transfer the loan, or it will lose its status as a qualified mortgage. The qualified mortgage
status continues under section 1026.43(f)(2), however, if the creditor transfers the loan to another
creditor that meets the requirements to be a small rural lender, or when the loan is transferred due
to a capital restoration plan, bankruptcy, or state or federal governmental agency order, or if the
mortgage is transferred pursuant to a merger or acquisition of the creditor. A qualified mortgage
can be transferred after three years without losing its status.
There is also a temporary qualified mortgage definition for balloon-payment mortgages that
would otherwise meet the requirements of section 1026.43(f), but that are originated by small
creditors that do not operate predominantly in rural or underserved areas. This category is
applicable to covered transactions consummated on or before January 10, 2016.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 129
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Subpart F – Special Rules for Private Education Loans
Subpart F relates to private education loans. It contains rules on disclosures (§1026.46), the right to
cancel the loan, (§1026.47), and limitations on changes in terms after approval and on co-branding
in the marketing of private education loans (§1026.48).
Special Disclosure Requirements for Private Education
Loans – Section 1026.46
The disclosures required under Subpart F apply only to private education loans. Except where
specifically provided otherwise, the requirements and limitations of Subpart F are in addition to
the requirements of the other subparts of Regulation Z.
A private education loan means an extension of credit that:
• Is not made, insured, or guaranteed under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965;
• Is extended to a consumer expressly, in whole or part, for postsecondary educational
expenses, regardless of whether the loan is provided by the educational institution that the
student attends; and
• Does not include open-end credit or any loan that is secured by real property or a dwelling.
A private education loan does not include an extension of credit in which the covered
educational institution is the creditor if:
• The term of the extension of credit is 90 days or less, or
• An interest rate will not be applied to the credit balance and the term of the extension of
credit is one year or less, even if the credit is payable in more than four installments.
Content of Disclosures – Section 1026.47
Disclosure Requirements
This section establishes the content that a creditor must include in its disclosures to a consumer
at three different stages in the private education loan origination process:
• Application or Solicitation Disclosures – With any application or solicitation;
• Approval Disclosures – With any notice of approval of the private education loan; and
• Final Disclosures – After the consumer accepts the loan. In addition, section 1026.48(d)
requires that the disclosures must be provided at least three business days prior to
disbursement of the loan funds.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 130
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Rights of the Consumer
The creditor must disclose that, if approved for the loan, the consumer has the right to accept the
loan on the terms approved for up to 30 calendar days. The disclosure must inform the consumer
that the rate and terms of the loan will not change during this period, except for changes to the
rate based on adjustments to the index used for the loan and other changes permitted by law. The
creditor must disclose that the consumer also has the right to cancel the loan, without penalty,
until midnight of the third business day following the date on which the consumer receives the
final disclosures.
Limitations on Private Educational Loans
– Section 1026.48
This section contains rules and limitations on private education loans, including:
1. A prohibition on co-branding in the marketing of private education loans;
2. Rules governing the 30-day acceptance period and three business-day cancellation period and
prohibition on disbursement of loan proceeds until the cancellation period has expired;
3. The requirement that the creditor obtain a self-certification form from the consumer before
consummation; and
4. The requirement that creditors in preferred lender arrangements provide certain information
to covered educational institutions.
Co-Branding Prohibited
Regulation Z prohibits creditors from using the name, emblem, mascot, or logo of a covered
institution (or other words, pictures, or symbols readily identified with a covered institution) in
the marketing of private education loans in a way that implies endorsement by the educational
institution. Marketing that refers to an educational institution does not imply endorsement if the
marketing includes a clear and conspicuous disclosure that is equally prominent and closely
proximate to the reference to the institution that the educational institution does not endorse the
creditor’s loans, and that the creditor is not affiliated with the educational institution. There is
also an exception in cases where the educational institution actually does endorse the creditor’s
loans, but the marketing must make a clear and conspicuous disclosure that is equally prominent
and closely proximate to the reference to the institution that the creditor, and not the educational
institution, is making the loan.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 131
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Subpart G – Special Rules Applicable To Credit Card
Accounts and Open-End Credit Offered To College
Students
Subpart G relates to credit card accounts under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit
plan (except for 12 CFR 1026.57(c), which applies to all open-end credit plans). This subpart
contains rules regarding credit and charge card application and solicitation disclosures (§1026.60).
It also contains rules on evaluation of a consumer’s ability to make the required payments under
the terms of an account (§1026.51), limits the fees that a consumer can be required to pay
(§1026.52), and contains rules on allocation of payments in excess of the minimum payment
(§1026.53). It also sets forth certain limitations on the imposition of finance charges as the result of
a loss of a grace period (§1026.54) and on increases in annual percentage rates, fees, and charges
for credit card accounts (§1026.55), including the reevaluation of rate increases (§1026.59). This
subpart prohibits the assessment of fees or charges for over-the-limit transactions unless the
consumer affirmatively consents to the creditor’s payment of over-the-limit transactions
(§1026.56). This subpart also sets forth rules for reporting and marketing of college student open-
end credit (§1026.57). Finally, it sets forth requirements for the Internet posting of credit card
accounts under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan (§1026.58).
Evaluation of the Consumer’s Ability to Pay
– Section 1026.51
Regulation Z requires credit card issuers to consider a consumer’s ability to pay before opening a
new credit card account or increasing the credit limit for an existing credit card account.
Additionally, the rule provides specific requirements that must be met before opening a new
credit card account or increasing the credit limit on an existing account when the consumer is
under the age of 21.
When evaluating a consumer’s ability to pay, credit card issuers must perform a review of a
consumer’s income or assets and current obligations. Issuers are permitted, however, to rely on
information provided by the consumer. The rule does not require issuers to verify a consumer’s
statements; a creditor may base its determination of ability to repay on facts and circumstances
known to the card issuer (Comment 1026.51(a)(1)(i)-2). A card issuer may also consider
information obtained through any empirically derived, demonstrably and statistically sound
model that reasonably estimates a consumer’s income or assets.
Issuers may consider any income and assets to which the consumer has a reasonable expectation
of access or may limit their consideration to the consumer’s independent income and assets. The
rule also requires that issuers consider at least one of the following:
• The ratio of debt obligations to income;
• The ratio of debt obligations to assets; or
• The income the consumer will have after paying debt obligations (i.e., residual income).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 132
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
The rule also provides that it would be unreasonable for an issuer not to review any information
about a consumer’s income, assets, or current obligations, or to issue a credit card to a consumer
who does not have any income or assets.
Because credit card accounts typically require consumers to make a minimum monthly payment
that is a percentage of the total balance (plus, in some cases, accrued interest and fees), creditors
are required to consider the consumer’s ability to make the required minimum payments. Card
issuers must also establish and maintain reasonable written policies and procedures to consider a
consumer’s income or assets and current obligations. Because the minimum payment is unknown
at account opening, the rule requires that creditors use a reasonable method to estimate a
consumer’s minimum payment. The regulation provides a safe harbor for issuers to estimate the
required minimum periodic payment if the card issuer:
1. Assumes utilization, from the first day of the billing cycle, of the full credit line that the
issuer is considering offering to the consumer; and
2. Uses a minimum payment formula employed by the issuer for the product the issuer is
considering offering to the consumer or, in the case of an existing account, the minimum
payment formula that currently applies to that account, provided that:
a. If the minimum payment formula includes interest charges, the card issuer estimates
those charges using an interest rate that the issuer is considering offering to the consumer
for purchases or, in the case of an existing account, the interest rate that currently applies
to purchases; and
b. If the applicable minimum payment formula includes mandatory fees, the card issuer
must assume that such fees have been charged to the account.
Specific Requirements for Underage Consumers
– Section 1026.51(b)(1)
Regulation Z prohibits the issuance of a credit card to a consumer who has not attained the age of
21 unless the consumer has submitted a written application and the creditor has:
• Information indicating that the underage consumer has an independent ability to make the
required minimum payments on the account; or
• The signature of a cosigner, guarantor, or joint applicant who has attained the age of 21, who
has the ability to repay debts (based on section 1026.51) incurred by the underage consumer
in connection with the account, and who assumes joint liability for all debts or secondary
liability for any debts incurred before the underage consumer attains 21 years of age.
For credit line increases:
• If an account was opened based on the underage consumer’s independent ability to repay, in
order to increase the consumer’s credit line before he or she turns 21, the issuer either must
determine that the consumer has an independent ability to make the required minimum
CFPB April 2015 TILA 133
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
payments at the time of the contemplated increase, or must obtain an agreement from a
cosigner, guarantor, or joint applicant who is 21 or older and who has the ability to repay
debts to assume liability for any debt incurred on the account.
• If the account was opened based on the ability of a cosigner over the age of 21 to pay, the
issuer must obtain written consent from that cosigner before increasing the credit limit.
Limitations of Fees – Section 1026.52
Limitations on Fees During First Year After Account Opening –
Section 1026.52(a)
During the first year after account opening, issuers are prohibited from requiring consumers to
pay fees (other than fees for late payments, returned payments, and exceeding the credit limit)
that in the aggregate exceed 25 percent of the initial credit limit in effect when the account is
opened. An account is considered open no earlier than the date on which the account may first be
used by the consumer to engage in transactions.
NOTE: The 25 percent limitation on fees does not apply to fees assessed prior to opening the
account.
Limitations on Penalty Fees – Section 1026.52(b)
TILA requires that penalty fees imposed by card issuers be reasonable and proportional to the
violation of the account terms. Among other things, the regulation prohibits credit card issuers
from charging a penalty fee of more than $25 for paying late or otherwise violating the account’s
terms for the first violation (or $35 for an additional violation of the same type during the same
billing cycle or one of the next six billing cycles) unless the issuer determines that a higher fee
represents a reasonable proportion of the costs it incurs as a result of that type of violation and
reevaluates that determination at least once every 12 months.
Credit card issuers are banned from charging penalty fees that exceed the dollar amount
associated with the consumer’s violation of the terms or other requirements of the credit card
account. For example, card issuers are no longer permitted to charge a $39 fee when a consumer
is late making a $20 minimum payment. Instead, in this example, the fee cannot exceed $20. The
regulation also bans imposition of penalty fees when there is no dollar amount associated with
the violation, such as “inactivity” fees based on the consumer’s failure to use the account to
make new purchases. It also prohibits issuers from charging multiple penalty fees based on a
single late payment or other violation of the account terms.
Payment Allocation – Section 1026.53
When different rates apply to different balances on a credit card account, issuers are generally
required to allocate payments in excess of the minimum payment first to the balance with the
highest APR and any remaining portion to the other balances in descending order based on the
applicable APR.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 134
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
For deferred interest programs, however, issuers must allocate excess payments first to the
deferred interest balance during the last two billing cycles of the deferred interest period. In
addition, during a deferred interest period, issuers are permitted (but not required) to allocate
excess payments in the manner requested by the consumer.
For accounts with secured balances, issuers are permitted (but not required) to allocate excess
payments to the secured balance if requested by the consumer.
Double-Cycle Billing and Partial Grace Period
– Section 1026.54
Issuers are generally prohibited from imposing finance charges on balances for days in previous
billing cycles as a result of the loss of a grace period. In addition, when a consumer pays some,
but not all, of a balance prior to the expiration of a grace period, an issuer is prohibited from
imposing finance charges on the portion of the balance that has been repaid.
Restrictions on Applying Increased Rates to Existing
Balances and Increasing Certain Fees and Charges
– Section 1026.55
Unless an exception applies, a card issuer must not increase an annual percentage rate or a fee or
charge required to be disclosed under sections 1026.6(b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iii), or (b)(2)(xii) on a
credit card account. There are some general exceptions to the prohibition against applying
increased rates to existing balances and increasing certain fees or charges:
• A temporary or promotional rate or temporary fee or charge that lasts at least six months, and
that is required to be disclosed under sections 1026.6(b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iii), or (b)(2)(xii),
provided that the card issuer complied with applicable disclosure requirements. Fees and
charges required to be disclosed under sections 1026.6(b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iii), or (b)(2)(xii) are
periodic fees for issuance or availability of an open-end plan (such as an annual fee); a fixed
finance charge (and any minimum interest charge) that exceeds $1; or a charge for required
insurance, debt cancellation, or debt suspension;
• The rate is increased due to the operation of an index available to the general public and not
under the card issuer’s control (i.e., the rate is a variable rate);
• The minimum payment has not been received within 60 days after the due date, provided that
the card issuer complied with applicable disclosure requirements and adheres to certain
requirements when a series of on time payments are received;
• The consumer successfully completes or fails to comply with the terms of a workout
arrangement, provided that card issuer complied with applicable disclosure requirements and
adheres to certain requirements upon the completion or failure of the arrangement; and
• The APR on an existing balance or a fee or charge required to be disclosed under sections
1026.6(b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iii), or (b)(2)(xii) has been reduced pursuant to the Servicemembers
CFPB April 2015 TILA 135
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Civil Relief Act (SCRA) or a similar federal or state statute or regulation. The creditor is
permitted to increase the rate, fee, or charge once the SCRA ceases to apply, but only to the
rate, fee, or charge that applied prior to the reduction.
Regulation Z’s limitations on the application of increased rates and certain fees and charges to
existing balances continue to apply when the account is closed, acquired by another institution
through a merger or the sale of a credit card portfolio, or when the balance is transferred to
another credit account issued by the same creditor (or its affiliate or subsidiary).
Issuers are generally prevented from increasing the APR applicable to new transactions or a fee or
charge subject to sections 1026.6(b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iii), or (b)(2)(xii) during the first year after an
account is opened. After the first year, issuers are permitted to increase the APRs that apply to new
transactions or a fee or charge subject to sections 1026.6(b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iii), or (b)(2)(xii) so long
as the creditor complies with the regulation’s 45-day advance notice requirement (§1026.9).
Regulation Z’s limitations on the application of increased rates to existing balances and
limitations on the increase of certain fees or charges apply upon cessation of a waiver or rebate
of interest, fees, or charges if the issuer promotes the waiver or rebate.
Fees for Transactions that Exceed the Credit Limit
– Section 1026.56
Consumer consent requirement – Regulation Z requires an issuer to obtain a
consumer’s express consent (or opt in) before the issuer may impose any fees on a consumer’s
credit card account for making an extension of credit that exceeds the account’s credit limit.
Prior to providing such consent, the consumer must be notified by the issuer of any fees that may
be assessed for an over-the-limit transaction. If the consumer consents, the issuer is also required
to provide written confirmation (or electronic confirmation if the consumer agrees) of the
consumer’s consent and a notice of the consumer’s right to revoke that consent on the front page
of any periodic statement that reflects the imposition of an over-the-limit fee.
Prior to obtaining a consumer’s consent to the payment of over-the-limit transactions, the issuer
must provide the consumer with a notice disclosing, among other things, the dollar amount of
any charges that will be assessed for an over-the-limit transaction, as well as any increased rate
that may apply if the consumer exceeds the credit limit. Issuers are prevented from assessing any
over-the-limit fee or charge on an account unless the consumer consents to the payment of
transactions that exceed the credit limit.
Prohibited practices – Even if the consumer has affirmatively consented to the issuer’s
payment of over-the-limit transactions, Regulation Z prohibits certain issuer practices in
connection with the assessment of over-the-limit fees or charges. An issuer can only charge one
over-the-limit fee or charge per billing cycle. In addition, an issuer cannot impose an over-the-
limit fee on the account for the same transaction in more than three billing cycles. Furthermore,
fees may not be imposed for the same transaction in the second or third billing cycle unless the
consumer has failed to reduce the account balance below the credit limit by the payment due date
in that cycle.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 136
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Regulation Z also prohibits unfair or deceptive acts or practices in connection with the
manipulation of credit limits in order to increase over-the-limit fees or other penalty charges.
Specifically, issuers are prohibited from engaging in three practices:
• Assessing an over-the-limit fee because the creditor failed to promptly replenish the
consumer’s available credit;
• Conditioning the amount of available credit on the consumer’s consent to the payment of
over-the-limit transactions (e.g., opting in to an over-the-limit service to obtain a higher
credit limit); and
• Imposing any over-the-limit fee if the credit limit is exceeded solely because of the issuer’s
assessment of accrued interest charges or fees on the consumer’s account.
Special Rules for Marketing to Students – Section 1026.57
Regulation Z establishes several requirements related to the marketing of credit cards and other
open-end consumer credit plans to students at an institution of higher education. The regulation
limits a creditor’s ability to offer a college student any tangible item to induce the student to
apply for or participate in an open-end consumer credit plan offered by the creditor. Specifically,
Regulation Z prohibits a card issuer from offering tangible items as an inducement:
• On the campus of an institution of higher education;
• Near the campus of an institution of higher education; or
• At an event sponsored by or related to an institution of higher education
A tangible item means physical items, such as gift cards, t-shirts, or magazine subscriptions, but
does not include non-physical items such as discounts, reward points, or promotional credit
terms. With respect to offers “near” the campus, the commentary to the regulation states that a
location that is within 1,000 feet of the border of the campus is considered near the campus.
Regulation Z also requires card issuers to submit an annual report to the CFPB containing the terms
and conditions of business, marketing, or promotional agreements with an institution of higher
education or an alumni organization or foundation affiliated with an institution of higher education.
Online Disclosure of Credit Card Agreements
– Section 1026.58
The regulation requires that issuers post credit card agreements on their websites and to submit
those agreements to the CFPB for posting on a website maintained by the CFPB. There are three
exceptions for when issuers are not required to provide statements to the CFPB:
• The issuer has fewer than 10,000 open credit card accounts; or
CFPB April 2015 TILA 137
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• The agreement currently is not offered to the public and the agreement is used only for one or
more private label credit card plans with credit cards usable only at a single merchant or
group of affiliated merchants and that involves fewer than 10,000 open accounts; or
• The agreement currently is not offered to the public and the agreement is for one or more
plans offered to test a new product offered only to a limited group of consumers for a limited
time that involves fewer than 10,000 open accounts.
Reevaluation of Rate Increases – Section 1026.59
For any rate increase imposed on or after January 1, 2009, that requires 45 days advance notice,
the regulation requires card issuers to review the account no less frequently than once each six
months and, if appropriate based on that review, reduce the annual percentage rate. The
requirement to reevaluate rate increases applies both to increases in annual percentage rates
based on consumer-specific factors, such as changes in the consumer’s creditworthiness, and to
increases in annual percentage rates imposed based on factors that are not specific to the
consumer, such as changes in market conditions or the issuer’s cost of funds. If based on its
review a card issuer is required to reduce the rate applicable to an account, the final regulation
requires that the rate be reduced within 45 days after completion of the evaluation.
This review must consider either the same factors on which the increase was originally based or
the factors the card issuer currently considers in determining the annual percentage rate
applicable to similar new credit card accounts.
Liability and Defenses
Civil Liability – TILA Sections 129B, 129C, 130 and 131
If a creditor fails to comply with any requirements of the TILA, other than with the advertising
provisions of chapter 3, it may be held liable to the consumer for:
• Actual damage, and
• Cost of any successful legal action together with reasonable attorney’s fees.
The creditor also may be held liable for any of the following:
• In an individual action, twice the amount of the finance charge involved.
• In an individual action relating to an open-end credit transaction that is not secured by real
property or a dwelling, twice the amount of the finance charge involved, with a minimum of
$500 and a maximum of $5,000 or such higher amount as may be appropriate in the case of
an established pattern or practice of such failure.
• In an individual action relating to a closed-end credit transaction secured by real property or
a dwelling, not less than $400 and not more than $4,000.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 138
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• In a class action, such amount as the court may allow (with no minimum recovery for each
class member). However, the total amount of recovery in any class actions arising out of the
same failure to comply by the same creditor cannot be more than $1 million or 1 percent of
the creditor’s net worth, whichever is less.
A creditor that fails to comply with section 129 of TILA, 15 U.S.C. section 1639, (requirements
for certain mortgages) may be held liable to the consumer for all finance charges and fees paid
by the consumer unless the creditor demonstrates that the failure was not material. A mortgage
originator that is not a creditor and that fails to comply with section 129B (requirements for
mortgage loan originators) also may be liable to consumers for the greater of actual damages or
an amount equal to three times the total amount of direct and indirect compensation or gain to
the mortgage originator in connection with the loan, plus costs, including reasonable attorney’s
fees. In addition, TILA section 130(a) provides that a creditor may be liable for failure to comply
with the ability-to-repay requirements of TILA section 129C(a) unless the creditor demonstrates
that the failure to comply was not material.
Generally, civil actions that may be brought against a creditor may be maintained against any
assignee of the creditor only if the violation is apparent on the face of the disclosure statement or
other documents assigned, except where the assignment was involuntary. For high-cost mortgage
loans (under section 1026.32(a)), any subsequent purchaser or assignee is subject to all claims
and defenses that the consumer could assert against the creditor, unless the assignee
demonstrates that it could not reasonably have determined that the loan was a high-cost mortgage
loan subject to section 1026.32.
In specified circumstances, the creditor or assignee has no liability if it corrects identified errors
within 60 days of discovering the errors and prior to the institution of a civil action or the receipt
of written notice of the error from the obligor. Additionally, a creditor and assignee will not be
liable for bona fide errors that occurred despite the maintenance of procedures reasonably
adapted to avoid any such error.
Moreover, the TILA also provides consumers with the right to assert a violation of the TILA’s
anti-steering provisions or the ability-to-repay standards for residential mortgage loan
requirements “as a matter of defense by recoupment or setoff” against a foreclosure action. In
general, the amount of recoupment or setoff shall be equal to the amount that the consumer
would be entitled to generally under 15 U.S.C. 1640(a) for a valid claim, plus the cost to the
consumer of the action (including reasonable attorney’s fees).
Refer to Sections 129B, 129C, 130 and 131 of TILA for more information.
Criminal Liability – TILA Section 112
Anyone who willingly and knowingly fails to comply with any requirement of the TILA will be
fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 139
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
Administrative Actions – TILA Section 108
The TILA authorizes federal regulatory agencies to require financial institutions to make
monetary and other adjustments to the consumers’ accounts when the true finance charge or APR
exceeds the disclosed finance charge or APR by more than a specified accuracy tolerance. That
authorization extends to unintentional errors, including isolated violations (e.g., an error that
occurred only once or errors, often without a common cause, that occurred infrequently and
randomly).
Under certain circumstances, the TILA requires federal regulatory agencies to order financial
institutions to reimburse consumers when understatement of the APR or finance charge involves:
• Patterns or practices of violations (e.g., errors that occurred, often with a common cause,
consistently or frequently, reflecting a pattern with a specific type or types of consumer credit).
• Gross negligence.
• Willful noncompliance intended to mislead the person to whom the credit was extended.
Any proceeding that may be brought by a regulatory agency against a creditor may be
maintained against any assignee of the creditor if the violation is apparent on the face of the
disclosure statement or other documents assigned, except where the assignment was involuntary
under section 131 (15 U.S.C. 1641).
Specific Defenses – TILA Section 108
Defense Against Civil, Criminal, and Administrative Actions
A financial institution in violation of TILA may avoid liability by:
• Discovering the error before an action is brought against the financial institution, or before
the consumer notifies the financial institution, in writing, of the error.
• Notifying the consumer of the error within 60 days of discovery.
• Making the necessary adjustments to the consumer’s account, also within 60 days of
discovery. (The consumer will pay no more than the lesser of the finance charge actually
disclosed or the dollar equivalent of the APR actually disclosed.)
The above three actions also may allow the financial institution to avoid a regulatory order to
reimburse the customer.
An error is “discovered” if it is:
• Discussed in a final, written report of examination.
• Identified through the financial institution’s own procedures.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 140
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• An inaccurately disclosed APR or finance charge included in a regulatory agency notification
to the financial institution.
When a disclosure error occurs, the financial institution is not required to re-disclose after a loan
has been consummated or an account has been opened. If the financial institution corrects a
disclosure error by merely re-disclosing required information accurately, without adjusting the
consumer’s account, the financial institution may still be subject to civil liability and an order to
reimburse from its regulator.
The circumstances under which a financial institution may avoid liability under the TILA do not
apply to violations of the Fair Credit Billing Act (chapter 4 of the TILA).
Additional Defenses Against Civil Actions
The financial institution may avoid liability in a civil action if it shows by a preponderance of
evidence that the violation was not intentional and resulted from a bona fide error that occurred
despite the maintenance of procedures to avoid the error.
A bona fide error may include a clerical, calculation, computer malfunction, programming, or
printing error. It does not include an error of legal judgment.
Showing that a violation occurred unintentionally could be difficult if the financial institution is
unable to produce evidence that explicitly indicates it has an internal controls program designed
to ensure compliance. The financial institution’s demonstrated commitment to compliance and
its adoption of policies and procedures to detect errors before disclosures are furnished to
consumers could strengthen its defense.
Statute of Limitations – TILA Sections 108, 129, 129B,
129C, 129D, 129E, 129F, 129G, 129H, and 130
In general, civil actions may be brought within one year after the violation occurred. For private
education loans, civil actions may be brought within one year from the date on which the first
regular payment of principal and interest is due. After that time, and if allowed by state law, the
consumer may still assert the violation as a defense if a financial institution were to bring an
action to collect the consumer’s debt.
A civil action for a violation of TILA section 129 (requirements for certain mortgages), 129B
(residential mortgage loan origination), or 129C (minimum standards for residential mortgage
loans) may be brought three years from the date of the occurrence of the violation (as compared
to one year for most other TILA violations). TILA section 130(e).
Moreover, TILA provides that when a creditor, assignee, other holder or anyone acting on such a
person’s on behalf initiates a foreclosure action on, or any other action to collect the debt in
connection with a residential mortgage loan, a consumer may assert a violation of TILA section
129B(c)(1) or (2) or 129C(a) “as a matter of defense by recoupment or set off.” TILA section
130(k). There is no time limit on the use of this defense and the amount of recoupment or setoff
CFPB April 2015 TILA 141
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
is limited, with respect to the special statutory damages, to no more than three years of finance
charges and fees.
Criminal actions and actions brought by regulators, are not subject to the general one-year statute
of limitations. Actions brought by a state attorney general to enforce a violation of section 129,
129B, 129C, 129D, 129E, 129F, 129G, or 129H, may be brought not later than 3 years after the
date on which the violation occurs.
However, administrative enforcement actions under the policy guide involving erroneously
disclosed APRs and finance charges may be subject to time limitations by the TILA. Those
limitations range from the date of the last regulatory examination of the financial institution, to
as far back as 1969, depending on when loans were made, when violations were identified,
whether the violations were repeat violations, and other factors.
There is no time limitation on willful violations intended to mislead the consumer. A general
summary of the various time limitations that otherwise apply follows.
• For open-end credit, reimbursement applies to violations not older than two years.
• For closed-end credit, reimbursement is generally directed for loans with violations occurring
since the immediately preceding examination.
Rescission Rights (Open-End and Closed-End Credit)
– Sections 1026.15 & 1026.23
TILA provides that for certain transactions secured by the consumer’s principal dwelling, a
consumer has three business days after becoming obligated on the debt to rescind the transaction.
The right of rescission allows consumer(s) time to reexamine their credit agreements and cost
disclosures and to reconsider whether they want to place their homes at risk by offering it as
security for the credit. A higher-priced mortgage loan (whether or not it is a HOEPA loan)
having a prepayment penalty that does not conform to the prepayment penalty limitations
(§§1026.32(c) and (d) and §1026.43(g), (subject to certain exclusions)) is also subject to a three-
year right of rescission. Transactions exempt from the right of rescission include residential
mortgage transactions (§1026.2(a)(24)) and refinancings or consolidations with the original
creditor where no “new money” is advanced.
If a transaction is rescindable, consumers must be given a notice explaining that the creditor has
a security interest in the consumer’s home, that the consumer may rescind, how the consumer
may rescind, the effects of rescission, and the date the rescission period expires.
To rescind a transaction, a consumer must notify the creditor in writing by midnight of the third
business day after the latest of three events:
• Consummation of the transaction,
• Delivery of material TILA disclosures, or
CFPB April 2015 TILA 142
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
• Receipt35 of the required notice of the right to rescind.
For purposes of rescission, business day means every calendar day except Sundays and the legal
public holidays (§1026.2(a)(6)). The term “material disclosures” is defined in section
1026.23(a)(3) to mean the required disclosures of the APR, the finance charge, the amount
financed, the total of payments, the payment schedule, and the disclosures and limitations
referred to in section 1026.32(c) and (d) and 1026.43(g).
The creditor may not disburse any monies (except into an escrow account) and may not provide
services or materials until the three-day rescission period has elapsed and the creditor is
reasonably satisfied that the consumer has not rescinded. If the consumer rescinds the
transaction, the creditor must refund all amounts paid by the consumer (even amounts disbursed
to third parties) and terminate its security interest in the consumer’s home.
A consumer may waive the three-day rescission period and receive immediate access to loan
proceeds if the consumer has a “bona fide personal financial emergency.” The consumer must
give the creditor a signed and dated waiver statement that describes the emergency, specifically
waives the right, and bears the signatures of all consumers entitled to rescind the transaction. The
consumer provides the explanation for the bona fide personal financial emergency, but the
creditor decides the sufficiency of the emergency.
If the required rescission notice or material TILA disclosures are not delivered or if they are
inaccurate, the consumer’s right to rescind may be extended from three days after becoming
obligated on a loan to up to three years.
35 12 CFR 1026.15(b) and 1026.23(b)(1) were amended to include the electronic delivery of the notice of the right to rescind. If a
paper notice of the right to rescind is used, a creditor must deliver two copies of the notice to each consumer entitled to rescind.
However, under the final rule on electronic delivery of disclosures if the notice is in electronic form, in accordance with the
consumer consent and other applicable provisions of the E-Sign Act, only one copy to each customer is required.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 143
CFPB
Laws and Regulations TILA
REFERENCES
Laws
15 U.S.C. 1601 et seq. Truth in Lending Act (TILA)
15 U.S.C. 1666 et seq. Fair Credit Billing Act
15 U.S.C. 7001 et seq. Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act
Regulations
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau Regulation (12 CFR)
Part 1026 Truth in Lending (Regulation Z)
Guides
CFPB compliance guides
TRID Guide to Forms
CFPB April 2015 TILA 144
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
1
Truth in Lending
Examination Objectives
1. To appraise the quality of the financial institution’s compliance management system for the
Truth in Lending Act and Regulation Z (12 CFR part 1026).
2. To determine the reliance that can be placed on the financial institution’s compliance
management system, including internal controls and procedures performed by the person(s)
responsible for monitoring the financial institution’s compliance review function for the
Truth in Lending Act and Regulation Z.
3. To determine the financial institution’s compliance with the Truth in Lending Act and
Regulation Z.
4. To initiate corrective action when policies or internal controls are deficient, or when
violations of law or regulation are identified.
5. To determine whether the institution will be required to make adjustments to consumer
accounts under the restitution provisions of the Truth in Lending Act.
1
These reflect FFIEC-approved procedures.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 1
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
General Procedures
1. Obtain information pertinent to the area of examination from the financial institution‘s
compliance management system program (historical examination findings, complaint
information, and significant findings from compliance review and audit).
2. Through discussions with management and review of the following documents, determine
whether the financial institution‘s internal controls are adequate to ensure compliance in the
area under review. Identify procedures used daily to detect errors/violations promptly. Also,
review the procedures used to ensure compliance when changes occur (e.g., changes in
interest rates, service charges, computation methods, and software programs).
• Organizational charts.
• Process flowcharts.
• Policies and procedures.
• Loan documentation and disclosures.
• Checklists/worksheets and review documents.
• Computer programs.
3. Review compliance review and audit workpapers and determine whether:
a. The procedures used address all regulatory provisions (see Transactional Testing
section).
b. Steps are taken to follow up on previously identified deficiencies.
c. The procedures used include samples that cover all product types and decision centers.
d. The work performed is accurate (through a review of some transactions).
e. Significant deficiencies, and the root cause of the deficiencies, are included in reports to
management/board.
f. Corrective actions are timely and appropriate.
g. The area is reviewed at an appropriate interval.
4. Review the financial institution‘s record retention practices to determine whether the
required documentation or evidence of compliance is retained for at least:
a. Two years after the disclosures were required to be made or other action was required to
be taken, other than for the advertising requirements, requirements for mortgages subject
CFPB April 2015 TILA 2
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
to sections 1026.19(e) and (f), and certain requirements for mortgages, which are
described below. (1026.25(a))
b. Three years after the later of the date of consummation, the date disclosures are required
to be made, or the date action is required to be taken, for evidence of compliance with
sections 1026.19(e)-(f) (regarding closed-end loans that are secured by real property and
subject to those sections) other than as set forth in 4.c below. (1026.25(c)(1)(i))
c. Five years after consummation for completed Closing Disclosure forms, and all
documents related to these disclosures, as required by section 1026.19(f)(1)(i) or (f)(4)(i).
If the loan is sold, transferred, or otherwise disposed of during that time, the creditor must
provide a copy of the Closing Disclosure to the owner or servicer as part of the loan file
transfer, who must retain the disclosure for the remainder of the five-year period.
(1026.25(c)(1)(ii))
d. Three years after the date of receipt of payment to show compliance with loan originator
compensation requirements. (1026.25(c)(2))
e. Three years after consummation to show compliance with ability-to-repay minimum
standards (1026.43(c)-(f)) and prepayment penalty restrictions (1026.43(g)) for loans
secured by a dwelling. (1026.25(c)(3))
Disclosure Forms
1. Determine if the financial institution has changed any TILA disclosure forms or if there are
forms that have not been previously reviewed for accuracy. If so:
Verify the accuracy of each disclosure by reviewing the following:
• Credit card application/solicitation disclosures (1026.60(b)-(e)).
• HELOC disclosures (1026.40(d) and (e)).
• Initial disclosures (1026.6) and, if applicable, additional HELOC disclosures (1026.40).
• Periodic statement disclosures (1026.7).
• Statement of billing rights and change in terms notice (1026.9(a),(b),(c) or (g)).
• Note and/or contract forms (including those furnished to dealers).
• Notice of Right to Rescind/Cancel (1026.15(b), 1026.23(b)(1)) and 1026.47(c)(4).
• Loan Estimate (1026.19(e) and 1026.37).
• Closing Disclosure (1026.19(f) and 1026.38).
• Special information booklet (1026.19(g)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 3
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
• Other closed-end credit transaction disclosures not subject to 12 CFR 1026.19(e) or (f)
(1026.17(a) and 1026.18).
• ARM disclosures (1026.19(b)).
• High-cost mortgage disclosures (1026.32(c)).
• Reverse mortgage disclosures (1026.33(b)).
• Private education loan disclosures (1026.47).
Closed-End Credit Disclosure Forms Review Procedures
Closed-end consumer credit transactions secured by real property, other than a reverse mortgage
subject to section 1026.33, are subject to the disclosure, timing, and other requirements under the
TILA-RESPA Integrated Disclosure rule (TILA-RESPA or TRID). Thus, for most closed-end
mortgages, including construction-only loans and loans secured by vacant land or by 25 or more
acres, creditors must provide the Loan Estimate and the Closing Disclosure. There is a partial
exemption in section 1026.3(h) from the requirement to provide the Loan Estimate and Closing
Disclosure if the loan is (i) a subordinate lien; (ii) a loan for home buyer assistance, such as
down payments or closing costs, rehabilitation loans, energy efficiency assistance, or foreclosure
prevention; (iii) a loan that does not require the payment of interest; (iv) a loan for which
repayment that is forgiven, deferred for 20 years, or deferred until the property is sold or is no
longer the consumer’s principal dwelling; and (v) a loan where the total costs of the transaction
are less than one percent of the loan and include fees only for recording, application, and housing
counseling. For those transactions, creditors must provide other applicable TILA disclosures.
NOTE: a creditor may not use the TRID forms instead of the GFE, HUD-1, and Truth in
Lending forms for transactions that continue to be covered by the remaining disclosure
requirements of TILA or RESPA (e.g., reverse mortgages) or before the effective date of the
TRID Rule (August 1, 2015). (1026.19(e), (f)).
Closed-End Credit Disclosure Forms – For transactions
under 1026.19(e) and (f)
1. For a closed-end credit transaction subject to sections 1026.19(e) and (f), determine whether
the creditor provides disclosures required under 1026.37 (Loan Estimate) and 1026.38
(Closing Disclosure). (1026.19(e) and 1026.19(f))
a. For loans subject to section 1026.19(e), determine whether the creditor provides the good
faith disclosures in the form required by 1026.37 and conforming to the Loan Estimate in
appendix H (1026.19(e), 1026.37(o)).
b. For loans subject to section 1026.19(f), determine whether the creditor provides the
Closing Disclosure in the form required by 1026.38 and conforming to the Closing
Disclosure attached at appendix H (1026.19(f), 1027.38(t)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 4
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
NOTE: Use of the Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure is mandatory for RESPA- covered
transactions. For transactions not covered by RESPA, the Loan Estimate and Closing
Disclosure may be considered a model form.
Loan Estimate – Section 1026.37(a) (Page 1 of the
Loan Estimate)
1. Loan Estimate. Determine whether the disclosures required for the Loan Estimate are
accurately completed and include the following disclosures on the first page (1026.37(a)).
Disclosures are detailed below according to the designations made on the Loan Estimate form:
a. The statement: “Save this Loan Estimate to compare with your Closing Disclosure”
(1026.37(a)(2));
b. Name and address of creditor. (1026.37(a)(3));
c. Date Issued. (1026.37(a)(4));
d. Applicants. (1026.37(a)(5));
e. Property. The property address, including zip code (1026.37(a)(6));
f. Sales Price/ Prop. Value (estimated value where there is no seller). (1026.37(a)(7));
g. Loan Term. Stated in years, months, or both, as applicable (1026.37(a)(8));
h. Purpose. Loan purpose, categorized as “Purchase,” “Refinance,” or “Construction.” All
other loan purposes must be categorized as “Home Equity Loan” (1026.37(a)(9));
i. Product. Product type, including the type of interest rate categorized as “Adjustable
Rate,” “Step Rate,” or “Fixed Rate.” This disclosure must be preceded by the type of
feature that may change the consumer’s periodic payment, such as “Negative
Amortization,” “Interest Only,” “Step Payment,” “Balloon Payment,” or “Seasonal
Payment,” with the duration of any introductory rate or payment period and the first
adjustment period if applicable (1026.37(a)(10)(i)-(iii));
j. Loan Type. Categorized as “Conventional,” “ FHA,” “VA,” or “Other” (1026.37(a)(11));
k. Loan ID #. (1026.37(a)(12)); and
l. Rate Lock. A statement of whether the disclosed rate is locked for a specific period. If so,
the date and time (including time zone) that the lock will expire, along with an
accompanying statement that the interest rate, any points, and any lender credits may
change unless the interest rate has been locked (1026.37(a)(13)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 5
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Loan Terms – Section 1026.37(b) (Page 1 of the
Loan Estimate)
1. Loan Terms. Determine whether, under the heading “Loan Terms,” all disclosures are
completed and accurate (1026.37(b)):
a. Loan Amount. (1026.37(b)(1));
b. Interest Rate. (1026.37(b)(2));
c. Principal and Interest. The applicable unit period (i.e., bi-weekly, monthly, yearly) must
precede the label “Principal and Interest” (1026.37(b)(3));
d. Prepayment Penalty. A statement of whether the loan contains a prepayment penalty, an
affirmative or negative response to the question, the maximum amount of the prepayment
penalty that may be imposed, and the date on which the penalty may no longer be
applied. (1026.37(b)(4), 1026.37(b)(7)(i)) If the date is disclosed (for an affirmative
response), determine whether it is disclosed as the year in which the event occurs,
counting from the date of consummation (1026.37(b)(8)(iii);
e. Balloon Payment. A statement of whether the loan contains a balloon payment, an
affirmative or negative response to the question, the maximum amount of the balloon
payment, and the due date of such payment. (1026.37(b)(5), 1026.37(b)(7)(ii)) If the date
is disclosed (for an affirmative response), determine whether it is disclosed as the year in
which the event occurs, counting from the due date of the initial periodic payment
(1026.37(b)(8)(ii)); and
f. Whether the loan amount, interest rate, or monthly principal and interest can increase
after closing (1026.37(b)(6)) and, if so, the information required by 1026.37(b)(6)(i)-(iii)
and 1026.37(b)(8)(i)-(ii).
Projected Payments – Section 1026.37(c) (Page 1 of the
Loan Estimate)
1. Projected Payments. Determine whether, under the heading “Projected Payments”
(1026.37(c))):
a. All required fields in the table are completed, follow the formatting and statement
requirements, are accurate, and itemize the periodic payments or range of payments
together with an itemized estimate of taxes, insurance, assessments, and payments to be
made with escrow account funds (1026.37(c)(1) – (5));
b. Each separate periodic payment or range of payments is itemized as follows
(1026.37(c)(2)):
CFPB April 2015 TILA 6
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
i. Principal and Interest. The amount payable for principal and interest, including the
term “only interest” if the payment or range of payments includes any interest only
payment (1026.37(c)(2)(i));
A. Adjustable Rate Loans. The maximum principal and interest payment must be
determined by assuming that the interest rate in effect throughout the loan term is
the maximum possible interest rate. The minimum amounts must be determined
by assuming that the interest rate in effect throughout the loan term is the
minimum possible interest rate (1026.37(c)(2)(i)(A));
B. Adjustable Rate and Negative Amortization Loans. The maximum principal and
interest amounts (after the loan term period for which the loan principal balance
may increase) must be determined by assuming the maximum principal amount
permitted under the terms of the legal obligation at the end of the loan term
period. The minimum amounts must be determined by assuming that the interest
rate in effect throughout the loan term is the minimum possible interest rate
(1026.37(c)(2)(i)(B));
ii. Mortgage Insurance. The maximum amount payable for mortgage insurance
premiums corresponding to the principal and interest payment disclosed
(1026.37(c)(2)(ii));
iii. Escrow. The amount payable into an escrow account to pay some or all of the charges
described in 1026.37(c)(2)(iii). If estimates are used for property taxes and
homeowner’s insurance, they must reflect (1026.37(c)(5)):
A. The taxable assessed value of the real property securing the transaction after
consummation, including the value of any improvements on the property or to be
constructed on the property if known. The disclosure must be made whether or
not such construction will be financed from the proceeds of the transaction for
property taxes (1026.37(c)(5)(i)); and
B. The replacement costs of the property during the initial year after the transaction,
defined as premiums or other charges for insurance against loss of or damage to
property, or against liability arising out of ownership or use of property
(1026.37(c)(5)(ii));
iv. Total Monthly Payment. The total periodic payment, calculated as the sums disclosed
as the “Principal and Interest,” “Mortgage Insurance,” and “Escrow.”
(1026.37(c)(2)(iv));
NOTE: The headings noted for the Projected Payments table must be listed under the
master heading “Payment Calculation” (1026.37(c)(3)(i)).
c. If the amount of a periodic monthly payment may change, additional, separate periodic
payments or range of payments have been disclosed. Events requiring additional
disclosure(s) include: (i) the change of the periodic principal and interest payment or
CFPB April 2015 TILA 7
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
range of such payments, (ii) a scheduled balloon payment, (iii) the automatic termination
of mortgage insurance, or (iv) the anniversary of the due date of the initial periodic
payment or range of payments immediately following the occurrence of a change in the
principal and interest payment or range of such payments (1026.37(c)(1)(i));
d. The creditor has met the following in disclosing a range of payments (1026.37(c)(1)(iii)):
i. The creditor has disclosed both the minimum and maximum amount for both the
principal and interest payment and the total periodic payment (1026.37(c)(1)(iii));
ii. The creditor has accurately disclosed a range of payments where multiple events are
combined into a single range of payments in order to meet the requirement that only
four disclosures may be made (1026.37(c)(1)(iii)(A));
iii. The creditor has accurately disclosed a range of payments where multiple events
occur during a single year or an event occurs during the same year as the initial
periodic payment or range of payments. If the event occurs during the same year as
the initial periodic payment or range of payments, the creditor has disclosed the range
that would apply during the year in which the events will occur
(1026.37(c)(1)(iii)(B));
iv. The creditor has accurately disclosed a range of payments if the periodic principal
and interest payment may adjust based on index rates at the time an interest rate
adjustment may occur (1026.37(c)(1)(iii)(C));
e. The creditor has not disclosed more than four separate periodic payments or ranges of
payments. (1026.37(c)(1)( ii)):
i. If additional separate periodic payments or range of payments disclosures are
required after the third separate periodic payment or range of payment disclosure, and
the transaction does not involve a balloon payment, determine whether the creditor
has disclosed the additional separate periodic payment or range of payments as a
single fourth range of payments disclosure. (1026.37(c)(1)(ii));
ii. If additional separate periodic payments or range of payments disclosures are
required and the transaction involves a final balloon payment, determine whether the
creditor has disclosed the additional separate periodic payment or range of payments
as a single range of payments after the second separate periodic payment disclosure.
Disclosure of the final balloon payment must appear as the final disclosure, under the
heading “Final Payment.” (1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(A), 1026.37(c)(3)(iii)); and
iii. The automatic termination of mortgage insurance requires disclosure of an additional
separate periodic payment or range of payments only if the total number of separate
periodic payments or ranges of payments does not exceed three
(1026.37(c)(1)(ii)(B));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 8
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
iv. Each separate periodic payment or range of payments must be disclosed under a
subheading stating the years of the loan during which that payment or range of
payments will apply. The years must be disclosed in sequence of whole years from
the due date of the initial periodic payment (1026.37(c)(3)(ii));
NOTE: See the Narrative for further discussion of requirements related to the Projected
Payments table.
f. Taxes, Insurance, and Assessments. Determine whether the creditor accurately discloses
(1026.37(c)(4)):
i. The sum of all mortgage-related obligations, expressed as a monthly amount, even if
no escrow account for the payment of some or any of such charges will be established
(1026.37(c)(4)(ii));
NOTE: Mortgage-related obligations, as used here, takes the definition used in
1026.43(b)(8); however, it does not include amounts identified in 1026.4(b)(5). Amounts
that must be disclosed as “Taxes, Insurance & Assessment” include premiums or other
charges for credit life, accident, health, or loss-of-income insurance; premiums or other
charges for insurance against loss of or damage to property, or against liability arising out
of the ownership or use of property; or premiums or charges paid for debt cancellation or
debt suspension coverage. (1026.43(b)(8))
ii. A statement that the mortgage-related obligations disclosed can increase over time
(1026.37(c)(4)(iii)). If estimates are used for property taxes and homeowner’s
insurance, they must reflect (1026.37(c)(5)):
A. The taxable assessed value of the real property securing the transaction after
consummation, including the value of any improvements on the property or to be
constructed on the property if known. The disclosure must be made whether or
not such construction will be financed from the proceeds of the transaction for
property taxes (1026.37(c)(5)(i)); and
B. The replacement costs of the property during the initial year after the transaction
for premiums or other charges for insurance against loss of or damage to property,
or against liability arising out of ownership or use of property (1026.37(c)(5)(ii));
iii. A statement of whether the mortgage-related obligations include payments for
property taxes; premiums or other charges for insurance against loss of or damage to
property, or against liability arising out of the ownership or use of property; or as
otherwise identified by 1026.43(b)(8). The creditor must disclose whether the
amounts will be paid by the creditor using escrow account funds. (1026.37(c)(4)(iv));
iv. A statement that the consumer must pay separately any mortgage-related obligations
that are not paid by the creditor using escrow account funds (1026.37(c)(4)(v));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 9
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
v. A reference to the escrow account information contained on page 2 of the Loan
Estimate, captioned “Initial Escrow Payment at Closing” (1026.37(c)(4)(vi)).
Costs at Closing – Section 1026.37(d) (Page 1 of the
Loan Estimate)
1. Costs at Closing. Determine whether, under the heading “Costs at Closing” the creditor
discloses the Estimated Closing Costs (including Loan Costs and Other Costs, less Lender
Credits) and the Estimated Cash to Close (including Closing Costs), based upon the
calculations required by section 1026.37(f), (g), and (h) (and found on page 2 of the Loan
Estimate). (1026.37(d)(1))
2. Optional Alternative Table for Transactions without a Seller. Determine whether, for
transactions that do not involve a seller, the creditor chose to use the alternative “Cash to
Close” table. If so, determine whether the amount is calculated in accordance with section
1026.37(h)(2)(iv) (Calculating Cash to Close), includes a statement of whether the disclosed
estimated amount is due from or to the consumer; and includes a statement referring the
consumer to the alternative “Calculating Cash to Close” table pursuant to section
1026.37(h)(2) and the model form found in appendix H-24(G). (1026.37(d)(2))
NOTE: See the Narrative for further discussion of requirements related to the Costs at
Closing table.
Website Disclosure – Section 1026.37(e) (Page 1 of the
Loan Estimate)
1. Website Reference. Determine whether the creditor discloses that the consumer may obtain
general information and tools on the Bureau’s website and has included a link to the site
specified in section 1026.37(e). (1026.37(e))
Closing Cost Details: Loan Costs – Section 1026.37(f)
(Page 2 of the Loan Estimate)
1. Loan Costs. Determine on page 2 whether, under the heading “Loan Costs,” the creditor
makes the following disclosures (1026.37(f)):
a. Origination charges. Accurately itemized to reflect each amount and a subtotal of all
amounts that the consumer will pay to each creditor and loan originator for originating
and extending the credit. Determine whether the points paid to the creditor to reduce the
interest rate are itemized separately, as both a percentage of the amount of credit
extended and a dollar amount, and using the label “__% of Loan Amount (Points).”
Determine whether points paid is the first item listed. If points to reduce the interest rate
are not paid, this disclosure must be left blank (1026.37(f)(1));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 10
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
b. Services You Cannot Shop For. An accurate itemization, limited to 13 items, of each
amount and subtotal of all amounts that the consumer will pay for settlement services that
the consumer cannot shop for and that are provided by persons other than the creditor or
mortgage broker. Determine whether the terms related to title insurance include “Title” as
an introductory description (1026.37)(f)(2);
c. Services You Can Shop For. An accurate itemization, limited to 14 items, of each amount
and subtotal of all amounts that the consumer will pay for settlement services that the
consumer can shop for and that are provided by persons other than the creditor or
mortgage broker. Determine whether the terms related to title insurance include “Title” as
an introductory description (1026.37)(f)(3));
d. Total Loan Costs. An accurate sum of the subtotals required to be disclosed under
1026.37(f) as Origination Charges, Services You Cannot Shop For and Services You Can
Shop For (1026.37(f)(4)); and
e. Other than as noted in item 1.a. above, determine that items are ordered alphabetically by
label under the applicable subheading. If there are more than the maximum allowable
number of line items, determine that the remaining charges are disclosed in the aggregate
in the last line as “Additional Charges.” (1026.37(f)(5) and (f)(6))
Closing Cost Details: Other Costs – Section 1026.37(g)
(Page 2 of the Loan Estimate)
1. Other Costs. Determine whether the creditor makes the following disclosures (1026.37(g)):
a. Taxes and Other Government Fees. Accurately itemized to reflect amounts to be paid to
state and local governments for taxes and other government fees, including subtotals for
recording fees and other taxes. A separate line must be included for transfer taxes paid by
the consumer. If not charged to the consumer, these fields must be left blank
((1026.37(g)(1));
b. Prepaids. Accurately itemized to reflect amounts to be paid by the consumer in advance
of the first scheduled payment and the subtotals of all such amounts. The disclosures
must follow the required order and include the number of months and the total dollar
amount to be paid at consummation for homeowner’s insurance and mortgage insurance
premiums; the prepaid interest to be paid at consummation, based on daily interest,
number of days, interest rate, and the total to be collected; the number of months for
which property taxes are to be paid; and the amount the consumer will pay at
consummation. If any of these items are not charged to the consumer, the field must be
left blank. A maximum of three additional items may be disclosed (including applicable
time period covered by the payment at consummation and total to be paid) as Prepaids
(1026.37(g)(2));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 11
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
c. Initial Escrow Payment at Closing. Accurately itemized to reflect the amounts that the
consumer will be expected to place into an escrow account at consummation to be
applied to recurring periodic charges and subtotals of all amounts. The disclosure must
provide the amount escrowed each month, the number of months of escrow, and the total
amount to be paid into the escrow account by the consumer at consummation.
Homeowner’s insurance premiums, mortgage insurance premiums, and property taxes
must be separately subtotaled. If any of these items are not charged to the consumer, that
field must be left blank. A maximum of five additional items may be disclosed as part of
Initial Escrow Payment at Closing (1026.37(g)(3));
d. Other. An accurate itemization of costs that the consumer is likely to pay, or has
contracted with a person other than the creditor or loan originator to pay, at closing and
of which the creditor is aware at the time of issuing the Loan Estimate. Determine
whether the creditor has used a descriptive label for each such amount and provided the
subtotal of all such amounts. Determine whether the terms related to title insurance
include “Title” as an introductory description and whether the parenthetical description
“(optional)” is used at the end of the label for items disclosing any premiums paid for
separate insurance, warranty, guarantee, or event-coverage products. A maximum of five
items may be disclosed as “Other” (1026.37(g)(4));
e. Total Other Costs. An accurate sum of the subtotals for Taxes and Other Government
Fees, Prepaids, Initial Escrow Payment at Closing, and Other disclosed pursuant to
1026.37(g)(1) through (4) (1026.37(g)(5));
f. Total Closing Costs. Accurate component amounts and sum of the following
(1026.37(g)(6)):
i. D+I. A sum of the Total Loan Costs and Total Other Costs (1026.37(g)(6)(i)); and
ii. Lender Credits. The amount of any lender credits, disclosed as a negative number. If
no such amount is disclosed, this line must be left blank (1026.37(g)(6)(ii)); and
g. Determine that items follow the alphabetical ordering and addenda restrictions of
1026.37(g)(7) and (g)(8).
Closing Cost Details: Calculating Cash to Close – Section
1026.37(h) (Page 2 of the Loan Estimate)
1. Calculating Cash to Close. Determine whether, under the heading “Calculating Cash to
Close,” the creditor has accurately disclosed the total amount of cash or other funds that must
be provided by the consumer at consummation, itemized into the following component
amounts: (1026.37(h)(1))
a. Total Closing Costs. The amount must be disclosed as a positive number
(1026.37(h)(1)(i));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 12
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
b. Closing Costs Financed (Paid from your Loan Amount). The amount of any closing costs
to be paid out of loan proceeds, disclosed as a negative number (1026.37(h)(1)(ii));
c. Downpayment/Funds from Borrower. Disclosed:
i. for a purchase transaction, as the amount of the difference between the purchase price
of the property and the principal amount of the loan, as a positive number;
ii. for all other transactions, as the estimated funds from the consumer determined in
calculating “Funds for Borrower” under 1026.37(h)(1)(v) (1026.37(h)(1)(iii));
d. Deposit. Disclosed:
i. for a purchase transaction, as the amount that is paid to the seller or held in trust or
escrow by an attorney or other party under the terms of the agreement for the sale of
the property, as a negative number;
ii. for all other transactions, disclosed as $0 (1026.37(h)(1)(iv));
e. Funds for Borrower. Disclosed as the amount of funds for the consumer, determined by
subtracting the principal amount of the credit extended (excluding any amount disclosed
as closing costs to be financed pursuant to 1026.37(h)(1)(ii)) from the total amount of all
existing debt being satisfied in the transaction (except to the extent the satisfaction of
such existing debt is disclosed as Other Costs under 1026.37(g)) (1026.37(h)(1)(v)):
i. If the calculation yields a positive number, that amount is disclosed under the heading
“Down Payment/Funds from Borrower,” (1026.37(h)(1)(iii)(B)) and $0 is disclosed
under the heading “Funds for Borrower,” under section 1026.37(h)(1)(v)
(1026.37(h)(1)(v)(A));
ii. If the calculation yields a negative amount, the creditor discloses that amount as a
negative number under the heading “Funds for Borrower,” (1026.37(h)(1)(v)) and as
$0 under the heading “Down Payment/Funds from Borrower under section
1026.37(h)(1)(iii)(B)) (1026.37(h)(1)(v)(B));
iii. If the calculation yields “0,” then $0 is disclosed under both headings under sections
1026.37(h)(1)(iii)(B) and (h)(1)(v) (1026.37(h)(1)(v)(C));
f. Seller Credits. Determined by totaling the amount the seller will pay for Total Loan Costs
under 1026.37(f)(4) and Total Other Costs under 1026.37(g)(5)), to the extent known.
This must be disclosed as a negative number (1026.37(h)(1)(vi));
g. Adjustments and Other Credits. Determined by combining the Total Loan Costs
(determined under 1026.37(f)) and Total Other Costs (determined under 1026.37(g)) that
are paid by persons other than the loan originator, creditor, consumer, or seller, together
with any other amounts that are required to be paid by the consumer at closing pursuant
CFPB April 2015 TILA 13
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
to a purchase and sale contract. Must be disclosed as a negative number
(1026.37(h)(1)(vii)); and
h. Estimated Cash to Close. The sum of the amounts of the components required for
Calculating Cash to Close disclosed as under 1026.37(h)(1)(i) through (vii)
(1026.37(h)(1)(viii)).
Closing Cost Details: Alternative Calculating Cash to Close
Table for Transactions without a Seller – Section
1026.37(h)(2) (Page 2 of the Loan Estimate)
1. Alternative Calculating Cash to Close Table for Transactions Without a Seller. If the
transaction does not involve a seller and the creditor has chosen to provide the optional
Alternative Calculating Cash to Close table modeled in appendix H-24(G), determine
whether the creditor accurately discloses the total amount of cash or other funds that must be
provided by the consumer as consummation, itemized into the following component amounts
(1026.37(h)(2)):
a. Loan Amount. (1026.37(h)(2)(i));
b. Total Closing Costs. Disclosed as a negative number (1026.37(h)(2)(ii));
c. Total Payoffs and Payments. Disclosed as the total amount of payoffs and payments to be
made to third parties that are not otherwise disclosed, as a negative number
(1026.37(h)(2)(iii));
d. Cash to Close. Disclosed as the amount of cash or other funds due from or to the
consumer and a statement of whether the disclosed estimated amount is due from or to
the consumer. The amount must be calculated as the sum of the amounts disclosed under
“Loan Amount,” “Total Closing Costs,” and “Total Payoffs and Payments.”
(1026.37(h)(2)(iv));
e. Closing Costs Financed (Paid from your Loan Amount). Disclosed as the sum of the
amounts under “Loan Amount,” and “Total Payoffs and Payments.” The sum is disclosed
only to the extent it is greater than “0,” and it is less than or equal to the amount disclosed
under “Total Closing Costs.” (1026.37(h)(2)(v))
NOTE: If a creditor chooses to provide the optional Alternative Calculating Cash to Close table
for transactions without a seller, the alternative table must also be used in the Closing Disclosure.
Closing Cost Details: Adjustable Payment (AP) Table –
Section 1026.37(i) (Page 2 of the Loan Estimate)
1. Adjustable Payment (AP) Table. For loans where the periodic principal and interest payment
may change after consummation based on a factor other than an interest rate adjustment, or
for seasonal payment products as described in section 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(E), determine
CFPB April 2015 TILA 14
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
whether the creditor discloses a separate table under the master headings “Closing Cost
Details” and “Adjustable Payment (AP) Table” that contains the following information and
satisfies the following requirements:
NOTE: The AP table is not to appear where it is inapplicable because the payments after
consummation change for reasons other than an adjustment to the interest rate.
a. Interest Only Payments. The disclosure states yes or no to the question of whether the
transaction is an interest only product under section 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(B) and, if the
answer is yes, the disclosure states the period during which interest only periodic
payments are scheduled (1026.37(i)(1));
b. Optional Payments. The disclosure states yes or no to the question whether the terms of
the legal obligation expressly provide that the consumer may elect to pay a specified
periodic principal and interest payment in an amount other than the scheduled amount of
the payment, and, if the answer is yes, the disclosure states the period during which the
consumer may elect to make such payments (1026.37(i)(2));
c. Step Payments. The disclosure states yes or no to the question whether the transaction is a
step payment product under section 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(C) and, if the answer is yes, the
disclosure states the period during which the regular periodic payments are scheduled to
increase (1026.37(i)(3));
d. Seasonal Payments. The disclosure states yes or no to the question whether the
transaction is a seasonal payment product under section 1026.37(a)(10)(ii)(E) and, if the
answer is yes, the disclosure states the period during which periodic payments are not
scheduled (1026.37(i)(4));
e. Principal and Interest Payments. This label is immediately preceded by the applicable
unit period, and the disclosures must contain the following information:
i. The number of the payment of the first periodic principal and interest payment that
may change under the terms of the legal obligation (counting from the first periodic
payment due after consummation), and the amount or range of the periodic principal
and interest payment for such payment, labeled “First Change/Amount”
(1026.37(i)(5)(i));
ii. The frequency of subsequent changes to the periodic principal and interest payment,
labeled “Subsequent Changes” (1026.37(i)(5)(ii)); and
iii. The maximum periodic principal and interest payment that may occur during the term
of the transaction, and the first periodic principal and interest payment that can reach
such maximum, counting from the first periodic payment due after consummation,
labeled “Maximum Payment” (1026.37(i)(5)(iii)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 15
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Closing Cost Details: Adjustable Interest Rate (AIR) Table
– Section 1026.37(j) (Page 2 of the Loan Estimate)
1. Adjustable Interest Rate (AIR) Table. If the interest rate may increase after consummation,
determine whether the creditor discloses, as a separate table under the master headings
“Closing Cost Details” and “Adjustable Interest Rate (AIR) Table,” the following
information and satisfies the following requirements: (1026.37(j))
NOTE: The AIR table is not to appear where it is inapplicable because the interest rate does
not adjust after consummation.
a. Index + Margin. Disclosed if the interest rate may adjust and the product type is not a
“Step Rate” under section 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(B). The disclosure must show the index
upon which the adjustments to the interest rate are based and the margin that is added to
the index to determine the interest rate (1026.37(j)(1);
b. Interest Rate Adjustments. If the product type is a “Step Rate” and not also an
“Adjustable Rate” under section 1026.37(a)(10)(i)(A), the disclosure must show the
maximum amount of any adjustments to the interest rate that are scheduled and
predetermined (1026.37(j)(2));
c. Initial Interest Rate. The disclosure must show the initial interest rate at consummation of
the loan transaction (1026.37(j)(3));
d. Minimum and Maximum Interest Rates. The disclosure must show the minimum and
maximum interest rates for the loan, after any introductory period expires (1026.37(j)(4);
e. Change Frequency. The disclosure must show the month when the interest rate after
consummation may first change, calculated from the date interest for the first scheduled
periodic payment begins to accrue, labeled “First Change;” and the frequency of interest
rate adjustments after the initial adjustment to the interest rate, labeled, “Subsequent
Changes” (1026.37(j);
f. Limits on Interest Rate Changes. The disclosures must show the maximum possible
change for the first adjustment of the interest rate after consummation, labeled “First
Change;” and the maximum possible change for subsequent adjustments of the interest
rate after consummation, labeled “Subsequent Changes.” (1026.37(j)
Additional Information About This Loan – Section
1026.37(k) (Page 3 of the Loan Estimate)
1. Additional Information About This Loan. Determine whether the creditor accurately
discloses contact and NMLSR information as follows:
a. Lender/Mortgage Broker. The name and “NMLS ID/License ID” for the creditor
(“Lender”) and the mortgage broker, if any. If the creditor or mortgage broker has not
CFPB April 2015 TILA 16
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
been assigned an NMLSR ID, the license number or other unique identifier issued to the
creditor or mortgage broker by the applicable jurisdiction or regulating body must be
disclosed, with the abbreviation for the state of the applicable jurisdiction or regulatory
body stated before the word “License” in the label, if any (1026.37(k)(1));
b. Loan Officer. The name and NMLSR ID of the individual loan officer of the creditor and
the mortgage broker, if any, who is the primary contact for the consumer. If the
individual loan officer has not been assigned an NMLSR ID, the license number or other
unique identifier issued by the applicable jurisdiction or regulating body with which the
loan officer is licensed and/or registered shall be disclosed, with the abbreviation for the
state of the applicable jurisdiction or regulatory body stated before the word “License” in
the label, if any (1026.37(k)(2)); and
c. Email/Phone (respectively). The email address and telephone number of the loan officer.
(1026.37(k)(3))
Additional Information About This Loan: Comparisons –
Section 1026.37(l) (Page 3 of the Loan Estimate)
1. Comparisons. Determine whether the creditor accurately discloses the following information
for comparison purposes and includes the statement “Use these measures to compare this
loan with other loans” (1026.37(l):
a. In 5 years (1026.37(l)(l));
i. The total principal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loan costs scheduled to be paid
through the end of the 60th month after the due date of the first periodic payment,
expressed as a dollar amount, along with the statement “Total you will have paid in
principal, interest, mortgage insurance, and loan costs;” and
ii. The principal scheduled to be paid through the end of the 60th month after the due
date of the first periodic payment, expressed as a dollar amount, along with the
statement “Principal you will have paid off;”
b. Annual Percentage Rate (APR). Expressed as a percentage, and the statement “Your costs
over the loan term expressed as a rate. This is not your interest rate.” (1026.37(l)(2)); and
c. Total Interest Percentage (TIP). The total amount of interest that the consumer will pay
over the life of the loan, expressed as a percentage of the amount of credit extended and
the statement “The total amount of interest that you will pay over the loan term as a
percentage of your loan amount” (1026.37(l)(3).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 17
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Additional Information About This Loan: Other
Considerations – Section 1026.37(m) (Page 3 of the
Loan Estimate)
1. Other Considerations. Determine whether the creditor accurately discloses the following
(1026.37(m):
a. Appraisal. For transactions subject to 15 U.S.C. 1639h or 1691(e), as implemented in this
part or Regulation B, 12 CFR part 1002, respectively, a statement, labeled “Appraisal”
that explains (1026.37(m)(1)):
i. The creditor may order an appraisal to determine the value of the property identified
in section 1026.37(a)(6) and may charge the consumer for that appraisal;
ii. The creditor will promptly provide the consumer a copy of any appraisal, even if the
transaction is not consummated; and
iii. The consumer may choose to pay for an additional appraisal of the property for the
consumer's use;
b. Assumption. A statement of whether a subsequent purchaser of the property may be
permitted to assume the remaining loan obligation on its original terms (1026.37(m)(2);
c. Homeowner's Insurance. At the option of the creditor, a statement that homeowner's
insurance is required on the property and that the consumer may choose the insurance
provider (1026.37(m)(3);
d. Late Payment. A statement detailing any charge that may be imposed for a late payment,
stated as a dollar amount or percentage charge of the late payment amount, and the
number of days that a payment must be late to trigger the late payment fee
(1026.37(m)(4);
e. Refinance. The following statement: “Refinancing this loan will depend on your future
financial situation, the property value, and market conditions. You may not be able to
refinance this loan.” (1026.37(m)(5));
f. Servicing. A statement of whether the creditor intends to service the loan or transfer the
loan to another servicer (1026.37(m)(6));
g. Liability after Foreclosure. If the purpose of the credit transaction is to refinance an
extension of credit as described in section 1026.37(a)(9)(ii), a brief statement that certain
state law protections against liability for any deficiency after foreclosure may be lost, the
potential consequences of the loss of such protections, and a statement that the consumer
should consult an attorney for additional information (1026.37(m)(7)); and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 18
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
h. Construction Loans. In a transaction that involves a new construction, if the creditor
reasonably expects settlement will occur more than 60 days after the Loan Estimate is
issued and wishes to retain the option to provide a revised disclosure, a clear and
conspicuous statement that a revised disclosure may be issued any time prior to 60 days
before consummation. (1026.37(m)(8))
Additional Information About This Loan: Confirm Receipt –
Section 1026.37(n) (Page 3 of the Loan Estimate)
1. Confirm Receipt. If the creditor choses to provide a signature statement, determine whether
the creditor accurately provides the following: “By signing, you are only confirming that you
have received this form. You do not have to accept this loan because you have signed or
received this form.” If the creditor does not include a line for the consumer's signature, the
creditor discloses the following statement (labeled “Loan Acceptance”): “You do not have to
accept this loan because you have received this form or signed a loan application.”
(1026.37(n))
Form of Disclosures – Section 1026.37(o)
1. Form of disclosures.2 Determine whether the creditor made the disclosures required by
section 1026.37 clearly and conspicuously in writing, in a form that the consumer may keep,
with disclosures grouped together and segregated from everything else, containing only the
information required by 1026.37 (a) through (n), made in the same order, and positioned
relative to the master headings, headings, subheadings, labels, and similar designations in the
same manner, as shown in form H-24, set forth in appendix H (1026.37(o)(1) and (2):
a. Form H-24 required. Determine whether, for a transaction subject to section 1026.19(e)
that is a federally related mortgage loan, as defined in Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.2, the
creditor uses form H-24, set forth in appendix H (1026.37(o)(3)(i)); or
b. Substantially similar disclosures. Determine whether the creditor makes the disclosures
with headings, content, and format substantially similar to form H-24, set forth in
appendix H for any other transaction subject to sections 1026.37 and (1026.37(o)(3)(ii))
c. Rounding - nearest dollar. Determine whether the creditor accurately rounds the
following figures to the nearest whole dollar disclosed pursuant to sections
(1026.37(o)(4)(i)(A)):
i. The dollar amounts for Loan Terms required by section 1026.37(b)(6)-(7), (i.e.,
adjustments after consummation and details about prepayment penalty and balloon
payments);
2
Limited changes to the disclosure forms are permitted, including substitution of “monthly” with the applicable unit period,
making disclosures in languages other than English, and the creditor’s logo in the space allotted for the identification of the
creditor. (1026.37(o)(5)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 19
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
ii. The dollar amounts for Projected Payments or range of payments required by section
1026.37(c)(1)(iii) (i.e., minimum and maximum amounts of principal and interest for
projected periodic payments or range of payments);
iii. The dollar amounts for Mortgage Insurance required to be disclosed by section
1026.37(c)(2)(ii) (i.e., itemization of maximum amount of mortgage insurance
premiums);
iv. The dollar amounts for Escrow required to be disclosed by section 1026.37(c)(2)(iii);
v. The dollar amounts for Taxes, Insurance, and Assessments required to be disclosed
by 1026.37(c)(4)(ii);
vi. The dollar amounts for Loan Costs required to be disclosed by 1026.37(f) (i.e.,
Origination Charges, Services You Cannot Shop For, Services You Can Shop For,
and Total Loan Costs);
vii. The dollar amounts for Other Costs required by 1026.37(g) (i.e., Taxes and Other
Government Fees, Prepaids, Initial Escrow Payment at Closing, Other, Total Other
Costs, and Total Closing Costs) except as noted for percentages;
viii. The dollar amounts for Calculating Cash to Close required to be disclosed by
1026.37(h);
ix. The dollar amounts for the Adjustable Payment (AP) Table required to be disclosed
by 1026.37(i); and
x. The dollar amounts for Comparisons required to be disclosed by 1026.37(l).
d. No rounding - dollars. Determine that the creditor did not round the following:
(1026.37(o)(4)(i)(A))
i. The per diem amount required by section 1026.37(g)(2)(iii) (prepaid interest paid per
day); and
ii. The figures disclosed pursuant to section 1026.37(g)(3)(i)-(iii) (initial escrow
payment at closing for homeowner’s insurance, mortgage insurance, and property
taxes) and 1026.37(g)(3)(v) (additional escrow items).
e. Loan amount. Determine that the creditor did not round the loan amount disclosed
pursuant to section 1026.37(b)(1) and truncated whole numbers at the decimal point.
(1026.37(o)(4)(i)(B))
f. Total periodic payment. Determine that the creditor accurately rounds the total periodic
payment disclosed pursuant to section 1026.37(c)(2)(iv), if any of the component
amounts of the figures disclosed pursuant to 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(A) are rounded to the
nearest whole dollar. (1026.37(o)(4)(i)(C))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 20
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
g. Percentages. Determine that the creditor does not round the following percentage
amounts and discloses them using up to the required number of decimal places
(1026.37(o)(4)(ii)):
i. Three decimal places. The Annual Percentage Rate (APR) disclosed pursuant to
1026.37(l)(2) is disclosed up to three decimal places, and if the amount is a whole
number, the amount is truncated at the decimal point.
ii. Two decimal places. The following percentages are disclosed up to two decimal
places, and if the amount is a whole number, the amount is truncated at the decimal
point for:
A. Interest rate and adjustments after consummation, disclosed pursuant to sections
1026.37(b)(2) and (6);
B. Points as a percentage of the loan amount, disclosed pursuant to section
1026.37(f)(1)(i);
C. Percentage of prepaid interest to be paid per day, disclosed pursuant to section
1026.37(g)(2)(iii);
D. Index + Margin, Initial Interest Rate, Minimum/Maximum Interest Rate, and
Limits on Interest Rate Changes (as disclosed on the Adjustable Interest Rate
(AIR) Table), disclosed pursuant to section 1026.37(j); and
E. Total interest percentage, disclosed pursuant to section
1026.37(l)(3).(1026.37(o)(4)(ii)).
Closing Disclosure – Section 1026.38(a)
1. Determine whether the disclosures required for the Closing Disclosure are accurately
completed and include the following disclosures:
a. Form purpose with the statement: “This form is a statement of final loan terms and
closing costs. Compare this document with your Loan Estimate.” (1026.38(a)(2))
Closing Information – Section 1026.38(a)(3) (Page 1 of
the Closing Disclosure)
1. Closing Information. Determine whether all fields required by 1026.38(a)(3) are complete
and accurate:
a. Date Issued. Indicating the date disclosures are delivered (1026.38(a)(3)(i));
b. Closing Date. (1026.38(a)(3)(ii));
c. Disbursement Date. (1026.38(a)(3)(iii));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 21
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
d. Settlement Agent. (1026.38(a)(3)(iv));
e. File #. Disclosing the identification number assigned to the transaction by the settlement
agent (1026.38(a)(3)(v));
f. Property. The address or location of the property as disclosed in the Loan Estimate
(1026.38(a)(3)(vi)); and
g. Sale Price/Appraised Prop. Value. For transactions where there is a seller, the sale price,
and where there is no seller, the appraised property value (1026.38(a)(3)(vii)(A)-(B)). If
the creditor disclosed an estimated value, the creditor must use the label “Estimated
Prop. Value.” (Comment 38.(a)(3)(vii)-1)
Transaction Information – Section 1026.38(a)(4) (Page 1
of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Transaction information. Determine whether all fields required by 1026.38(a)(4) are
complete and accurate:
a. Borrower. The consumer’s name and mailing address (1026.38(a)(4)(i));
b. Seller. Where applicable, the seller’s name and mailing address (1026.38(a)(4)(ii));
c. Lender. The name of the creditor making the disclosure (1026.38(a)(4)(iii)).
Loan Information – Section 1026.38(a)(5) (Page 1 of the
Closing Disclosure)
1. Loan Information. Determine whether all fields required by 1026.38(5) are complete and
accurate:
a. Loan Term. (1026.38(a)(5)(i));
b. Purpose. (1026.38(a)(5)(ii));
c. Product. (1026.38(a)(5)(iii));
d. Loan Type. (1026.38(a)(5)(iv));
e. Loan ID #. (1026.38(a)(5)(v)); and
f. MIC #. The case number for any mortgage insurance policy, if required by the creditor
(1026.38(a)(5)(vi)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 22
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Loan Terms – Section 1026.38(b) (Page 1 of the Closing
Disclosure)
1. Loan Terms. Determine whether the creditor discloses, in a separate table labeled “Loan
Terms,” the information required to be disclosed on the Loan Estimate under section
1026.37(b) reflecting the terms of the legal obligation at consummation (1026.38(b)).
Projected Payments – Section 1026.38(c) (Page 1 of the
Closing Disclosure)
1. Projected Payments. Determine whether the creditor discloses, in a separate table labeled
“Projected Payments,” the projected payments or range of payments (in the same manner as
required on the Loan Estimate under section 1026.37(c)(1) through (4)(v)) reflecting the
terms of the legal obligation at consummation. Determine whether the creditor referred to the
Escrow Account disclosure required by 1026.38(l)(7) and calculated the estimated escrow
payments (1026.38(c)(1)-(2)):
a. For transactions subject to RESPA, under the escrow account analysis described in
Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.17 (1026.38(c)(1)(i)); and
b. For transactions not subject to RESPA, either calculated under the escrow account
analysis described in Regulation X, 12 CFR 1024.17, or in the manner set forth in section
1026.37(c)(5), (1026.38(c)(1)(ii)).
Costs at Closing – Section 1026.38(d) (Page 1 of the
Closing Disclosure)
1. Costs at Closing. Determine whether the creditor discloses:
a. Closing Costs. Disclosed as the sum of the dollar amounts disclosed on page 2 of the
Closing Disclosure, pursuant to sections1026.38(f)(4) (Loan Costs), 1026.38(g)(5) (Other
Costs), and 1026.38(h)(3) (Lender Credits), together with a statement referring the
consumer to the disclosures on page 2 (1026.38(d)(i)(A)-(E));
b. Cash to Close. Disclosed as the sum of the dollar amounts calculated in accordance with
the Calculating Cash to Close table (1026.38(i)(9)(ii)), together with a statement referring
the consumer to the disclosures on page 2 (1026.38(d)(ii)(A) – (B)); or
c. Cash to Close (Alternative for transactions without a seller). Disclosed as the amount
calculated according to 1026.38(e)(5)(ii), together with a statement of whether the
amount is due from or to the consumer and a reference to the Alternative Calculating
Cash to Close table required pursuant to 1026.38(e), (1026.38(d)(2)(i) – (iii)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 23
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Closing Cost Details: Loan Costs – Section 1026.38(f)
(Page 2 of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Loan Costs. Determine whether the creditor disclosed all costs associated with the
transaction, with columns stating whether the charge was borrower-paid at or before closing,
seller-paid at or before closing, or paid by others, under the following subheadings:
a. Origination Charges. Itemized amounts paid for charges disclosed on the Loan
Estimate (1026.37(f)(1)) and the total of Borrower-Paid amounts paid at or before
closing; together with:
i. The compensation paid by the creditor to a third-party loan originator, and
ii. The name of the third-party loan originator receiving payment (1026.38(f)(1));
b. Services Borrower Did Not Shop For. Itemized costs for each settlement service the
creditor required but did not allow the consumer to shop for, with name of recipient,
amount, and total costs designated Borrower-Paid at or before closing. Items listed in the
Loan Estimate (1026.37(f)(3)) are disclosed here if the consumer was provided a written
list of settlement service providers under section 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(C), and the consumer
selected a settlement service provider from that written list (1026.38(f)(2));
c. Services Borrower Did Shop For. Itemized costs for each service required by the creditor,
that the consumer shopped for in accordance with section 1026.19(e)(1)(vi)(A), with the
amount, the name of recipient, and the total costs designated as Borrower-Paid at or
before closing. If these items were disclosed on the Loan Estimate pursuant to
1026.37(f)(3), they are disclosed here if the consumer was provided a written list of
settlement service providers and did not select a settlement service provider from that
written list (1026.38(f)(3));
d. Total Loan Costs (Borrower-Paid). The sum of the amounts disclosed under section
1026.38(f)(5) as Borrower-Paid for the origination charge, services the borrower did not
shop for, and services the borrower did shop for (1026.38(f)(4));
e. Loan Costs Subtotals. Calculation of the total borrower-paid costs at or before closing,
showing each subtotal for the origination charge, services the borrower did not shop for,
and services the borrower did shop for. (1026.38(f)(5))
Closing Cost Details: Other Costs – Section 1026.38(g)
(Page 2 of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Other Costs. Determine whether the creditor disclosed all costs associated with the
transaction (other than those disclosed in the “Loan Costs” table) with columns stating
whether the charge was borrower-paid at or before closing, seller-paid at or before closing or
paid by others, including:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 24
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
a. Taxes and Other Government Fees. All taxes and government fees to be paid by the
borrower at or before closing, including recording fees and transfer taxes, accurately
itemized. Determine that the itemized transfer tax is accompanied by the name of the
government entity assessing the transfer tax. (1026.38(g)(1)(i)-(ii))
b. Prepaids. Accurately itemized prepaid charges described in the borrower’s Loan
Estimate as required by 1026.37(g)(2); the name of the person ultimately receiving the
prepaid payment or the government entity assessing the property tax charged; and the
total of all amounts designated as Borrower-Paid at or before closing. (1026.38(g)(2))
c. Initial Escrow Payment at Closing. Accurate itemizations of each escrow amount
required at closing as described on the borrower’s Loan Estimate pursuant to section
1026.37(g)(3) (e.g., homeowner’s insurance, mortgage insurance, property taxes, etc.);
applicable aggregate adjustments pursuant to 12 CFR 1024.17(d)(2); and the total of all
amounts designated as Borrower-Paid at or before closing. (1026.38(g)(3))
d. Other. All charges, accurately itemized, for services required or related to the borrower’s
transaction that are in addition to the charges disclosed in the Loan Costs table
(1026.38(f)) and in the preceding sections of the Other Costs table (1026.38(g)(1)-(3)),
for services required or obtained in the real estate closing by the consumer, the seller, or
other party and the name of the person ultimately receiving the payment; and the total of
all such itemized amounts that are designated Borrower-Paid at or before closing, with
the applicable designations for items that are optional or are components of title
insurance services. (1026.38(g)(4)(i)-(ii))
e. Total Other Costs (Borrower--Paid). Accurately totaled and disclosed sum of all amounts
disclosed as Borrower-Paid. (1026.38(g)(5))
f. Other Costs Subtotals. Accurately added individual subtotals in the “Closing Cost Details
– Other Costs” table disclosed under section 1026.38(g)(1)-(4) to produce the total.
(1026.38(g)(6))
Closing Cost Details: Total Closing Costs – Section
1026.38(h) (Page 2 of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Total Closing Costs (Borrower-Paid). Determine whether the creditor:
a. Follows the description, labeling, and ordering requirements for this table;
(1026.38(h)(4)) and
b. Accurately discloses the following closing costs totals:
i. Total Closing Costs (Borrower-Paid). The sum of subtotals for Closing Costs
(1026.38(h)(2)) and Lender Credits (1026.38(h)(3)) (i.e., the following two items in
this list). (1026.38(h)(1))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 25
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
ii. Closing Costs Subtotals. Consisting of the sum of “Loan Cost Subtotals”
(1026.38(f)(5) and the “Other Costs Subtotals” (1026.38(g)(6)), designated as
Borrower-Paid at or before closing; and the sum of costs paid at and before closing by
the seller or other parties (as disclosed pursuant to sections 1026.38(f) and (g)).
(1026.38(h)(2))
iii. Lender Credits. For general credits from the creditor for closing costs (as described in
section 1026.37(g)(6)(ii), shown as a negative number, and designated as Borrower-
Paid at closing. (1026.38(h)(3))
NOTE: Credits that are for specific charges should be reflected in the Paid by Others
column in the Closing Cost Details table (with a notation of “(L)” for lender permitted)
under sections 1026.38(f) and (g). (1026.38(h)(3); Comment 38(h)(3)-1)
A. If a refund is provided pursuant to section 1026.19(f)(2)(v), determine whether
the creditor has provided a statement explaining that the refund (the amount
described in the Loan Estimate under 1026.37(g)(6)(ii)) includes a credit for the
amount that exceeds the limitations on increases in closing costs under
1026.19(e)(3), and the amount of such credit.
Calculating Cash to Close – Section 1026.38(i) (Page 3 of
the Closing Disclosure)
1. Calculating Cash to Close. Determine whether the creditor, for each of the following items,
accurately includes the amount from the Loan Estimate, compared to the amount disclosed in
the “Final” column, and provides the necessary answer to the question “Did This Change?”
(with items in the latter column disclosed more prominently than other disclosures)
(1026.38(i)(1)(i)-(iii)):
a. Total Closing Costs. The Total Closing Costs on the Calculating Cash to Close table of
the Loan Estimate disclosed under 1026.37(h)(1)(i) compared to the final “Total Closing
Costs” disclosed under 1026.38(h)(1), and:
i. If the amounts are different (unless due to rounding), the creditor has provided:
(1026.38(i)(1)(i)-(ii))
A. A statement of that fact, and (1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(A)(1))
B. If the difference in the “Total Closing Costs” is attributable to differences in
itemized charges that are included in either or both subtotals, a statement that the
consumer should see the Total Loan Costs (under 1026.38(f)(4)) and Total Other
Costs (under 1026.38(g)(5)) subtotals (together with references to such
disclosures), as applicable; and (1026.38(i)(1)(A)(2))
C. If the increase exceeds the limitations on increases in closing costs under
1026.19(e)(3), a statement that such increase exceeds the legal limits by the dollar
CFPB April 2015 TILA 26
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
amount of the excess, and if any refund is provided pursuant to 1026.19(f)(2)(v), a
statement directing the consumer to the disclosure required under section
1026.38(h)(3). The dollar amount must equal the sum total of all excesses of the
limitations on increases in closing costs under 1026.19(e)(3), taking into account
the different methods of calculating excesses of the limitations on increases in
closing costs under 1026.19(e)(3)(i) and (ii). (1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(A)(3))
ii. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(1)(ii) (i.e., amount in the Final
column) is equal to the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(1)(i) (i.e., amount
copied over from the Loan Estimate), a statement of that fact. (1026.38(i)(1)(iii)(B))
b. Closing Costs Paid Before Closing. Under the subheading “Loan Estimate,” the dollar
amount “$0,” compared to the final amount of “Total Closing Costs” disclosed under
section 1026.38(h)(2) and designated as Borrower-Paid before closing, stated as a
negative number, and (1026.38(i)(2)(i)-(iii)):
i. If these amounts are different (unless the difference is due to rounding), the creditor
has provided a statement of that fact, along with a statement that the consumer paid
such amounts prior to consummation of the transaction (1026.38(i)(2)(iii)(A)); or if
the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(2)(ii) (i.e., amount in the Final
column) is equal to the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(2)(i) (i.e., $0), a
statement of that fact; (1026.38(i)(2)(iii)(B))
c. Closing Costs Financed (Paid from your Loan Amount). Under the subheading “Loan
Estimate,” the amount disclosed on Calculating Cash to Close table on the Loan Estimate
under 1026.37(h)(1)(ii), compared to the actual amount of the closing costs that are to be
paid out of loan proceeds, if any, stated as a negative number (1026.38(i)(3)(i)-(iii)); and
i. If the amounts are different (unless the difference is due to rounding), a statement of
that fact, along with a statement that the consumer included the closing costs in the
loan amount, which increased the loan amount (1026.38(i)(3)(iii)(A)); or
ii. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(3)(ii) (i.e., amount in the Final
column) is equal to the amount disclosed pursuant to 1026.38(i)(3)(i) (i.e., amount
copied over from the Loan Estimate), a statement of that fact. (1026.38(i)(3)(iii)(B))
d. Down Payment/Funds from Borrower. For purchase transactions, under the subheading
“Loan Estimate,” the Down Payment/Funds from Buyer amount disclosed on the
Calculating Cash to Close table on the Loan Estimate under 1026.37(h)(1)(iii), compared
to the difference between the purchase price of the property and the principal amount of
the credit extended, stated as a positive number in the “Final” column. For transactions
that are not purchases, the amount in the “Final” column is determined according to
1026.38(i)(6)(iv), discussed below. (1026.38(i)(4)(i)-(ii))
i. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(4)(ii) (i.e., amount in the Final
column) is different, unless due to rounding, from the amount disclosed under section
CFPB April 2015 TILA 27
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
1026.38(i)(4)(i) (i.e., amount copied over from the Loan Estimate), a statement of that
fact, along with a statement that the consumer increased or decreased this payment
and can see further details in the “Summaries of Transactions” table
(1026.38(i)(4)(iii)(A)); or
ii. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(4)(ii) is equal to the amount
disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(4)(i), a statement of that fact.
(1026.38(i)(4)(iii)(B))
e. Deposit. Under the subheading “Loan Estimate,” the Deposit amount disclosed on the
Calculating Cash to Close table on the Loan Estimate under 1026.37(h)(1)(iv), compared
to the amount listed as “Deposit” on the Summaries of Transactions table on the Closing
Document pursuant to 1026.38(j)(2)(ii), stated as a negative number, (1026.38(i)(5)(i)-
(ii)) and
i. If the amounts are different, unless due to rounding, a statement of that fact, along
with a statement that the consumer increased or decreased this payment, as
applicable, and that the consumer should see the details disclosed under section
1026.38(j)(2)(ii) (i.e., in Section L in the Summaries of Transactions table)
(1026.38(i)(5)(iii)(A)); or
ii. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(5)(ii) (i.e., amount in the Final
column) is equal to the amount disclosed 1026.38(i)(5)(i) (i.e., amount copied over
from the Loan Estimate), a statement of that fact. (1026.38(i)(5)(iii)(B))
f. Funds for Borrower. Under the subheading “Loan Estimate,” the amount disclosed on the
Calculating Cash to Close table on the Loan Estimate under 1026.37(h)(1)(v), compared
to the amount listed in the Final column calculated pursuant to 1026.38(i)(6)(iv)
(NOTE: see next item for calculation); (1026.38(i)(6)(i)-(iii)), and
i. If the amounts are different, unless due to rounding, a statement of that fact, along
with a statement that the consumer's available funds from the loan amount have
increased or decreased, as applicable (1026.38(i)(6)(iii)(A)); or
ii. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(6)(ii) (i.e., amount in the Final
column) is equal to the amount disclosed 1026.38(i)(6)(i) (i.e., amount copied over
from the Loan Estimate), a statement of that fact. (1026.38(i)(6)(iii)(B))
g. Funds for Borrower. Determine whether the creditor accurately calculates the “Funds for
Borrower” for non-purchase transactions and the final “Funds for Borrower” by
subtracting the principal amount of the credit extended (excluding any amount disclosed
pursuant to 1026.38(i)(3)(ii)) from the total amount of all existing debt being satisfied in
the real estate closing disclosed on the Summaries of Transactions table pursuant to
1026.38(j)(1)(v) (except to the extent the satisfaction of such existing debt is disclosed
under section 1026.38(g)), and (1026.38(i)(6)(iv)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 28
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
i. If the calculation yields a positive number, it is disclosed as described above in the
Final Down Payment/Funds from Borrower column under section
1026.38(i)(4)(ii)(B), and $0 is disclosed as described above in the Final Funds for
Borrower column under 1026.38(i)(6)(ii). (1026.38(i)(6)(iv)(A))
ii. If the calculation under section 1026.38(i)(6)(iv) yields a negative number, it is
disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(6)(ii), as a negative number in the Final Funds for
Borrower column described above, and $0 is disclosed as described above in the Final
Down Payment/Funds from Borrower column under section 1026.38(i)(4)(ii)(B).
(1026.38(i)(6)(iv)(B))
iii. If the calculation under section 1026.38(i)(6)(iv) yields $0, then $0 is disclosed in
both the Final Down Payment/Funds from Borrower column under section
1026.38(i)(4)(ii)(B) and in the Final Funds for Borrower column described above
under section 1026.38(i)(6)(ii). (1026.38(i)(6)(iv)(C))
h. Seller Credits. Under the subheading “Loan Estimate,” the amount disclosed on the
Calculating Cash to Close table on the Loan Estimate under 1026.37(h)(1)(vi), compared
to the amount listed pursuant to 1026.38(j)(2)(v), stated as a negative number
(1026.38(i)(7)(i)-(ii)), and
i. If the amounts are different, unless due to rounding, a statement of that fact, along
with a statement that the consumer should see the details disclosed under section
1026.38(j)(2)(v) (i.e., in Section L in the Summaries of Transactions table)
(1026.38(i)(7)(iii)(A)), or
ii. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(7)(ii) (i.e., amount in the Final
column) is equal to the amount disclosed 1026.38(i)(7)(i) (i.e., amount copied over
from the Loan Estimate), a statement of that fact. (1026.38(i)(7)(iii)(B))
i. Adjustments and Other Credits. Under the subheading “Loan Estimate,” the amount
disclosed on the Calculating Cash to Close table on the Loan Estimate under
1026.37(h)(1)(vii), compared to the amount listed pursuant to 1026.38(j)(1)(v) through
(x) (see exam procedures below on Itemization of Amounts Due From Borrower) reduced
by the total of the amounts disclosed under section 1026.38(j)(2)(vi) through (xi) (see
exam procedures below on Itemization of Amounts Already Paid By or On Behalf of
Borrower). (1026.38(i)(8)(i)-(ii))
i. If the amounts are different, unless due to rounding, statement of that fact, along with
a statement that the consumer should see the details disclosed under section
1026.38(j)(1)(v) through (x) and (j)(2)(vi) through (xi) (i.e., in Sections K and L in
the Summaries of Transactions table) (1026.38(i)(8)(iii)(A)); or
ii. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(i)(8)(ii) (i.e., amount in the Final
column) is equal to the amount disclosed 1026.38(i)(8)(i) (i.e., amount copied over
from the Loan Estimate), a statement of that fact. (1026.38(i)(8)(iii)(B))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 29
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
j. Cash to Close. Under the subheading “Loan Estimate,” the amount disclosed on the
Calculating Cash to Close table on the Loan Estimate under 1026.37(h)(1)(viii), compared
to the amount listed pursuant to 1026.38(i)(1) through (i)(8), and each disclosed more
prominently than the other disclosures in this section. (1026.38(i)(9)(i)-(ii))
Alternative Cash to Close Table for Transactions Without a
Seller – Section 1026.38(e) (Page 3 of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Determine whether, for transactions without a seller, the creditor uses the alternative table in
the Loan Estimate (1026.37(h)(2)), and if so, determine whether the creditor provides,
instead of the table described in section 1026.38(i), a separate table, “Calculating Cash to
Close,” with the statement “Use this table to see what has changed from your Loan
Estimate.” Determine whether the table includes:
a. Loan Amount. Disclosed on the Loan Estimate under 1026.37(b)(1) and the final loan
amount disclosed under section 1026.38(b), disclosed more prominently than other
disclosures in this section, with the question “Did this change?” If the amounts are
different (unless due to rounding), a statement of that fact along with a statement of
whether this amount increased or decreased. If there is no change, a statement of that fact.
(1026.38(e)(1)(i) – (iii))
b. Total Closing Costs. Disclosed on the Loan Estimate under 1026.37(h)(2)(ii) and the final
Total Closing Costs disclosed under section 1026.38(h)(1), disclosed as a negative
number and disclosed more prominently than other disclosures, with the question “Did
this change?” If there is no change, a statement of that fact. (1026.38(e)(2)) If the
amounts are different (unless due to rounding):
i. A statement of that fact.
ii. If there is a change because of differences in itemized charges that are included in
either or both subtotals, a statement that the consumer should look at the Total Loan
Costs and Total Other Costs subtotals disclosed below, together with references to
those disclosures (1026.38(e)(2)(iii)(A)(2)); and
iii. If the increase exceeds the legal limits for increases in closing costs under
1026.19(e)(3); a statement of that fact, the dollar amount of the excess; and, if any
refund is provided, a reference to the disclosure required for including the refund in a
lender credit under section 1026.38(h)(3). (1026.38(e)(2)(A)(3))
c. Closing Costs Paid before Closing. Disclosed under the subheading “Loan Estimate,” the
amount of $0; and under the subheading “Final,” any amount designated as Borrower-
Paid before closing under section 1026.38(h)(2), disclosed as a positive number.
Determine whether these disclosures are disclosed more prominently than other
disclosures, with the question “Did This Change?” If so (unless the difference is due to
CFPB April 2015 TILA 30
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
rounding), a statement of that fact. If there is no change, a statement of that fact.
(1026.38(e)(3))
i. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(e)(3)(ii) is different than the amount
disclosed under section 1026.38(e)(3)(i), unless due to rounding, a statement of that
fact along with a statement that the consumer paid such amounts prior to
consummation (1026.38(e)(3)(iii)(A)); or
ii. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(e)(3)(ii) is equal to the amount
disclosed under section 1026.38(e)(3)(i), a statement of that fact.
(1026.38(e)(3)(iii)(B))
d. Total Payoffs and Payments. Includes the total payoffs and payments disclosed on the
Loan Estimate under section 1026.37(h)(2)(iii) and the final total amount of payoffs and
payments made to third parties not otherwise disclosed under section
1026.38(t)(5)(vii)(B), to the extent known, disclosed as a negative number. Determine
whether these disclosures are disclosed more prominently than other disclosures with the
question “Did This Change?” If so (unless the difference is due to rounding), a statement
of that fact. If there is no change, a statement of that fact. (1026.38(e)(4))
i. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(e)(4)(ii) is different than the amount
disclosed under section 1026.38(e)(4)(i)(unless the difference is due to rounding), a
statement that the consumer included the closing costs in the loan amount, which
increased the loan amount, along with a reference to the “Payoffs and Payments”
table that may be added pursuant to 1026.38(t)(5)(viii)(B)) (1026.38(e)(4)); or
ii. If the amount disclosed under section 1026.38(e)(4)(ii) is equal to the amount
disclosed under section 1026.38(e)(4)(i), a statement of that fact.
(1026.38(e)(4)(iii)(B))
e. Cash to Close. The estimated Cash to Close disclosed on the Loan Estimate, along with
the statement of whether the estimated amount is due from or to the consumer, and a
disclosure of the final amount due from or to the consumer.(1026.38(e)(5)(i) – (ii)
f. Closing Costs Financed (Paid from your Loan Amount). Disclosed as the sum of the
amounts disclosed under section 1026.38(e)(1)(ii) and (e)(4)(ii) (i.e., the amounts in the
Final Column of the Loan Amount and Total Payoffs and Payments). However, the
amount is disclosed only to the extent that the sum is greater than zero and less than or
equal to the sum disclosed under section 1026.38(h)(1) (Total Closing Costs) minus the
sum disclosed under section 1026.38(h)(2) designated as Borrower-Paid before closing.
(1026.38(e)(6))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 31
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Summaries of Transactions: Borrower’s Transaction –
Section 1026.38(j) (Page 3 of the Closing Disclosure)
Borrower’s Transaction – Itemization of Amounts Due from
Borrower at Closing (Page 3 of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Due from Borrower at Closing. Determine whether the creditor accurately discloses the total
amount due from the consumer at closing, calculated as the sum of items required to be
disclosed by 1026.38(j)(1)(ii) through (x) (i.e., the items described in this procedure),
excluding items paid from funds other than closing funds as described in section
1026.38(j)(4)(i). Determine whether the creditor completes the summary of the borrower’s
transaction as follows: (1026.38(j)(1))
a. Sale Price of Property. The amount of the contract sales price of the property being sold
in a purchase real estate transaction, excluding the price of any tangible personal property
if the consumer and seller have agreed to a separate price for such items
(1026.38(j)(1)(ii));
b. Sale Price of Any Personal Property Included in Sale. The amount of the sales price of
any tangible personal property excluded from the contract sales price pursuant to section
1026.38(j)(1)(ii) (1026.38(j)(1)(iii));
c. Closing Costs Paid at Closing. The total amount of closing costs disclosed that are
designated Borrower-Paid at closing, calculated pursuant to section 1026.38(h)(2) (see
procedure above regarding Closing Costs Subtotals)(1026.38(j)(1)(iv));
d. A description and the amount of any additional items that the seller has paid prior to the
real estate closing, but reimbursed by the consumer at the real estate closing, and a
description and the amount of any other items owed by the consumer at the real estate
closing not otherwise disclosed pursuant to section 1026.38(f), (g), or (j)
(1026.38(j)(1)(v));
e. The description “Adjustments for Items Paid by Seller in Advance” (1026.38(j)(1)(vi));
f. City/Town Taxes. The prorated amount of any prepaid taxes due from the consumer to
reimburse the seller at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding to that
amount (1026.38(j)(1)(vii));
g. County Taxes. The prorated amount of any prepaid taxes due from the consumer to
reimburse the seller at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding to that
amount (1026.38(j)(1)(viii));
h. Assessments. The prorated amount of any prepaid assessments due from the consumer to
reimburse the seller at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding to that
amount (1026.38(j)(1)(ix)); and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 32
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
i. A description and the amount of any additional items paid by the seller prior to the real
estate closing that are due from the consumer at the real estate closing (1026.38(j)(1)(x)).
Borrower’s Transaction – Itemization of Amounts Paid
Already By or On Behalf of Borrower at Closing (Page 3 of
the Closing Disclosure)
1. Paid Already by or on Behalf of Borrower at Closing. Determine whether the creditor
accurately discloses the sum of the amounts disclosed in section 1026.38(j)(2)(ii) through
(xi) (i.e., the items described in this procedure), excluding items paid from funds other than
closing funds as described in section 1026.38(j)(4)(i). Determine whether the creditor
accurately completes the summary of borrower’s transaction as follows (1026.38(j)(2)(i)):
a. Deposit. Any amount that is paid to the seller or held in trust or escrow by an attorney or
other party under the terms of the agreement for the sale of the property
(1026.38(j)(2)(ii));
b. Loan Amount. The amount of the consumer's new loan amount or first user loan as
disclosed pursuant to section 1026.38(b) (1026.38(j)(2)(iii));
c. Existing Loan(s) Assumed or Taken Subject To. The amount of any existing loans that the
consumer is assuming, or any loans subject to which the consumer is talking title to the
property (1026.38(j)(2)(iv));
d. Seller Credit. The total amount of money that the seller will provide at the real estate
closing as a lump sum not otherwise itemized to pay for loan costs as determined by
section 1026.38(f) and other costs as determined by section 1026.38(g) and any other
obligations of the seller to be paid directly to the consumer (1026.38(j)(2)(v));
e. Other Credits. A description and amount of other items paid by or on behalf of the
consumer and not otherwise disclosed pursuant to section 1026.38(f), (g), (h), and (j)(2)
(1026.38(j)(2)(vi));
f. The description “Adjustments for Items Unpaid by Seller” (1026.38(j)(2)(vii));
g. City/Town Taxes. The prorated amount of any unpaid taxes due from the seller to
reimburse the consumer at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding to
that amount (1026.38(j)(2)(viii)ix));
h. County Taxes. The prorated amount of any unpaid taxes due from the seller to reimburse
the consumer at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding to that amount
(1026.38(j)(2)(ix);
i. Assessments. The prorated amount of any unpaid assessments due from the seller to
reimburse the consumer at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding that
amount (1026.38(j)(2)(x)); and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 33
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
j. A description and the amount of any additional items which have not yet been paid and
which the consumer is expected to pay after the real estate closing, but which are
attributable in part to a period of time prior to the real estate closing (1026.38(j)(2)(xi)).
Borrower’s Transaction – Calculation of Borrower’s
Transaction (Page 3 of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Calculation. Determine whether the creditor accurately discloses the total amount due from,
and already paid by, the consumer at closing by the following calculation: (1026.38(j)(3))
a. Total Due from Borrower at Closing. The amount disclosed in the Closing Disclosure, on
the line captioned “Due from Borrower at Closing” (1026.38(j)(3)(i));
b. Total Paid Already by or on Behalf of Borrower at Closing. The amount disclosed in the
Closing Disclosure, on the line captioned “Paid Already by or on Behalf of Borrower at
Closing,” if any, disclosed as a negative number (1026.38(j)(3)(ii)); and
c. Cash to Close. A statement that the disclosed amount is due from or to the consumer, and
the amount due from or to the consumer at the real estate closing, calculated by the sum
of the amounts disclosed as the “Total Due from Borrower at Closing” and “Total Paid
Already by or on Behalf of Borrower at Closing” (1026.38(j)(3)(iii)).
2. Paid Outside of Closing. Determine whether the creditor discloses other costs that are not
paid out of closing costs but would otherwise be disclosed; describes the funds as “Paid
Outside of Closing” or the abbreviation “P.O.C.,” and includes the name of the party making
the payment. (1026.38(j)(4)(i))
NOTE: For purposes of section 1026.38(j), “closing funds” means funds collected and
disbursed at real estate closing. (1026.38(j)(4)(ii))
Summaries of Transactions: Seller’s Transaction – Section
1026.38(k) (Page 3 of the Closing Disclosure)
Seller’s Transaction – Itemization of Amounts Due to Seller
at Closing (Page 3 of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Due to Seller at Closing. Determine whether the creditor accurately discloses the total
amount due to the seller at the real estate closing, calculated as the sum of items required to
be disclosed pursuant to section 1026.38(k)(1)(ii) through (ix) (i.e., the items in this
procedure), excluding items paid from funds other than closing funds as described in section
1026.38(k)(4)(i). Determine whether the creditor accurately completes the summary of
seller’s transaction as follows (1026.38)(k)(1)(i)):
CFPB April 2015 TILA 34
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
a. Sale Price of Property. The amount of the contract sales price of the property being sold,
excluding the price of any tangible personal property if the consumer and seller have
agreed to a separate price for such items (1026.38(k)(1)(ii));
b. Sale Price of Any Personal Property Included in Sale. The amount of the sales price of
any tangible personal property excluded from the contract sales price pursuant to section
1026.38(k)(1)(ii) (1026.38(k)(1)(iii));
c. A description and the amount of other items paid to the seller by the consumer pursuant
to the contract of sale or other agreement, such as charges that were not disclosed
pursuant to section 1026.37 on the Loan Estimate or items paid by the seller prior to the
real estate closing but reimbursed by the consumer at the real estate closing
(1026.38(k)(1)(iv));
d. The description “Adjustments for Items Paid by Seller in Advance” (1026.38(k)(1)(v));
e. City/Town Taxes. The prorated amount of any prepaid taxes due from the consumer to
reimburse the seller at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding to that
amount (1026.38(k)(1)(vi);
f. County Taxes. The prorated amount of any prepaid taxes due from the consumer to
reimburse the seller at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding to that
amount (1026.38(k)(1)(vii));
g. Assessments. The prorated amount of any unpaid assessments due from the consumer to
reimburse the seller at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding that
amount (1026.38(k)(1)(viii)); and
h. A description and the amount of additional items paid by the seller prior to the real estate
closing that are reimbursed by the consumer at the real estate closing (1026.38(k)(1)(ix)).
Seller’s Transaction – Itemization of Amounts Due from
Seller at Closing (Page 3 of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Due from Seller at Closing. Determine whether the creditor accurately discloses the sum of
the amounts disclosed in sections 1026.38(k)(2)(ii) through 1026.38(k)(2)(xiii) (i.e., the
items in this procedure), excluding items paid from funds other than closing funds described
in section 1026.38(k)(4)(i). Determine whether the creditor accurately completes the
summary of the seller’s transaction as follows (1026.38(k)(2)(i)):
a. Excess Deposit. The amount of any excess deposit disbursed prior to closing,
(1026.38(k)(2)(ii));
b. Closing Costs Paid at Closing. The amount of closing costs designated Seller-Paid at
closing and disclosed pursuant to section 1026.38(h)(2) (1026.38(k)(2)(iii));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 35
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
c. Existing Loan(s) Assumed or Taken Subject To. The amount of any existing loans
assumed or taken subject to by the consumer (1026.38(k)(2)(iv));
d. Payoff of First Mortgage Loan. The amount of a first lien loan secured by the property
being sold that will be paid off at closing (1026.38(k)(2)(v));
e. Payoff of Second Mortgage Loan. The amount of any loan secured by a second lien on
the property that will be paid off as part of the real estate closing (1026.38(k)(2)(vi));
f. Seller Credit. The total amount of seller funds to be provided at closing as a lump sum
that has not otherwise been itemized to pay for loan costs as determined by section
1026.38(f) and other costs as determined by section 1026.38(g) and any other obligations
of the seller to be paid directly to the consumer (1026.38(k)(2)(vii);
g. A description and amount of all other items paid to be paid by the seller at closing,
including any lien-related payoffs, fees, or obligations (1026.38(k)(2)(viii));
h. The description “Adjustments for Items Unpaid by Seller” (1026.38(k)(2)(ix));
i. City/Town Taxes. The prorated amount of unpaid taxes due from the seller to reimburse
the consumer at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding to that amount
(1026.38(k)(2)(x);
j. County Taxes. The prorated amount of any unpaid taxes due from the seller to the
consumer at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding to that amount
(1026.38(k)(2)(xi));
k. Assessments. The prorated amount of any unpaid assessments due from the seller to
reimburse the consumer at the real estate closing, and the time period corresponding to
that amount (1026.38(k)(2)(xii)); and
l. A description and the amount of any additional items which have not yet been paid and
which the consumer is expected to pay after the real estate closing, but which are
attributable in part to a period of time prior to the real estate closing (1026.38(k)(2)(xiii)).
Seller’s Transaction – Calculation of Seller’s Transaction
(Page 3 of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Calculation. Determine whether the creditor accurately discloses the total amount due to and
from the seller at closing by the following calculation (1026.38(k)(3)):
a. Total Due to Seller Closing. The amount disclosed in the Closing Disclosure, on the line
captioned “Due from Seller at Closing” (1026.38(k)(3)(i));
b. Total Due from Seller at Closing. The amount disclosed in the Closing Disclosure on the
line captioned “Due from Seller at Closing,” disclosed as a negative number
(1026.38(k)(3)(ii));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 36
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
c. Cash. A statement that the disclosed amount is due from or to the seller and the amount
due, calculated by the sum of the amounts disclosed as the “Total Due to Seller at
Closing” and “Total Due from Seller at Closing” (1026.38(k)(3)(iii)).
Seller’s Transaction – Items Paid Outside of Closing Funds
(Page 3 of Closing Disclosure)
1. Determine whether the creditor discloses other costs that are not paid out of closing funds but
would otherwise be disclosed in the Summaries of Transactions: Seller’s Transaction table;
describing the funds as “Paid Outside of Closing” or the abbreviation “P.O.C.,” and
including the name of the party making the payment. (1026.38(k)(4)(i))
NOTE: For purposes of section 1026.38(k), “closing funds” means funds collected and
disbursed at real estate closing. (1026.38(k)(4)(ii))
Payoffs and Payments Table for Transactions Without a
Seller – Section 1026.38(t)(5)(vii)(B) (Page 3 of the
Closing Disclosure)
1. Payoff and Payments. For transactions without a seller, determine whether a creditor, using
an optional modified Closing Disclosure (as illustrated by form H-25(J) in appendix H), has
provided alternative tables for Cash to Close, pursuant to section 1026.38(d)(2), and for
Calculating Cash to Close pursuant to 1026.38(e), and that the creditor itemizes the amounts
of payments made at consummation to other parties from the credit extended to the consumer
or funds provided by the consumer in connection with the transaction, including designees of
the consumer, the payees, and a description of the purpose of such disbursements under the
subheading “To;” and the total amount of such payments (1026.38(t)(5)(vii)(B)).
Additional Information About This Loan: Loan Disclosures
– Section 1026.38(l) (Page 4 of the Closing Disclosure)
1. Loan Disclosures. Determine whether the creditor accurately provides the required
disclosures (1026.38(l)):
a. Assumption. Whether the loan obligations may be assumed by a subsequent purchaser
(1026.38(l)(1));
b. Demand Feature. Whether the legal obligation includes a demand feature, and, if it does,
a reference to the note or other loan contract for details (1026.38(l)(2));
c. Late Payment. The dollar amount or percentage charge of any fee designated as a late
payment (information required on the Loan Estimate by 1026.37(m)(4)) and the number
of days after which such a charge will be triggered (1026.38(l)(3));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 37
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
d. Negative Amortization (Increase in Loan Amount). Whether the regular period payments
may cause the principal balance to increase, and:
i. If the regular periodic payments do not cover all of the interest due, the creditor
provides a statement that the borrower’s principal balance will increase, such balance
will likely become larger than the original loan amount, and increases in such balance
lower the consumer’s equity in the property; and
ii. If the consumer may make regular periodic payments that do not cover all of the
interest due, the creditor provides a statement that, if the consumer chooses a monthly
payment option that does not cover all of the interest due, the principal balance may
become larger than the original loan amount and the increases in the principal balance
lower the consumer’s equity in the property. (1026.38(l)(4)(i)-(ii))
e. Partial Payments. Whether the creditor that accepts less than the full amount due has
provided a statement that the “lender,” (using that label) may accept partial payments and
apply such payments to the consumer's loan, and:
i. If periodic payments that are less than the full amount due are accepted but not
applied to a consumer's loan until the consumer pays the remainder of the full amount
due, a statement that the lender may hold partial payments in a separate account until
the consumer pays the remainder of the payment and then apply the full periodic
payment to the consumer's loan;
ii. If periodic payments that are less than the full amount due are not accepted, the lender
does not accept any partial payments; and
iii. A statement that, if the loan is sold, the new lender may have a different policy.
(1026.38(l)(5)(i)-(iv))
f. Security Interest. Whether the creditor states that the consumer is granting a security
interest in the property securing the transaction, and that the borrower may lose the
property if required payments are not made or otherwise fails to satisfy the requirements
of the legal obligation. Determine that the creditor has included the property address and
zip code (1026.38(l)(6));
g. Escrow Account. Whether the creditor states whether it has established, will establish, or
will not establish an escrow account for the consumer in connection with the loan
transaction at or before consummation;
i. Under the reference “For now,”
A. Whether the creditor provides a statement that an escrow account may also be
called an impound or trust account; whether the creditor has established or will
establish, at or before consummation, an escrow account in connection with the
transaction for the costs that will be paid using escrow account funds; that the
creditor may be liable for penalties and interest if it fails to make a payment for
CFPB April 2015 TILA 38
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
any cost for which the escrow account is established; and that the consumer
would have to pay such costs directly in the absence of the escrow account;
(1026.38(l)(7)(i) and (l)(7)(i)(A)).Whether, if an escrow account is or will be
established, the creditor accurately discloses the following items based upon the
escrow analysis required under 12 CFR 1024.17, in tabular form:
1) The total amount that the consumer will be required to pay into the account
over the first year after consummation for the payment of the charges
described in section 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) together with a descriptive name of each
such charge calculated as the Monthly Escrow Payment multiplied by the
number of periodic payments scheduled to be made to the escrow account
during the first year after consummation. (1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(1))
2) The estimated amount for taxes, insurance, and assessments that the consumer
is likely to pay during the first year after consummation, as described in
1027.37(c)(4)(ii), that are known to the creditor and that will not be paid using
escrow account funds, labeled “Non-Escrowed Property Costs over Year 1,”
together with a descriptive name of each such charge and a statement that the
consumer may have to pay other costs that are not listed.
(1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(2))
3) The total amount disclosed and a reference to the disclosure made on the
Closing Disclosure under the heading “Other Costs, Initial Escrow Payment at
Closing,” pursuant to 1026.38(g)(3), and a statement that the payment is a
cushion for the escrow account, labeled “Initial Escrow Payment.”
(1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(3))
4) The amount the consumer will be required to pay into the escrow account with
each periodic payment during the first year after consummation for payment
of the charges described in the Loan Estimate pursuant to 1026.37(c)(4)(ii),
labeled “Monthly Escrow Payment.” (1026.38(l)(7)(i)(A)(4))
ii. No Escrow. If an escrow account will not be established for the consumer, determine
whether there is a statement that the consumer will not have an escrow account; the
reason why an escrow account will not be established; a statement that the consumer
must pay all property costs, such as taxes and homeowner's insurance, directly; a
statement that the consumer may contact the creditor to inquire about the availability
of an escrow account; and a table, titled “No Escrow” that itemizes the estimated total
amount the consumer will pay directly for charges described in the Loan Estimate
under 1026.37(c)(4)(ii) during the first year after consummation that are known to the
creditor; and a statement that, without an escrow account, the consumer must pay the
identified costs, possibly in one or two large payments, labeled “Property Costs over
Year 1;” along with the amount of any fee the creditor imposes on the consumer for
not establishing an escrow account in connection with the transaction, labeled
“Escrow Waiver Fee.” (1026.38(l)(7)(i)(B))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 39
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
A. Under the reference “In the future,” determine whether the creditor has disclosed
under the reference “In the future:” (1026.38(l)(7)(ii))
1) A statement that the consumer's property costs may change and that, as a
result, the consumer's escrow payment may change; (1026.38(l)(7)(ii)(A))
2) A statement that the consumer may be able to cancel any escrow account that
has been established but that the consumer is responsible for directly paying all
property costs in the absence of an escrow account; (1026.38(l)(7)(ii)(B)) and
3) A description of the consequences if the consumer fails to pay property costs,
including the actions that a state or local government may take if property
taxes are not paid and the actions the creditor may take if the consumer does
not pay some or all property costs, such as adding amounts to the loan
balance, adding an escrow account to the loan, or purchasing a property
insurance policy on the consumer's behalf that may be more expensive and
provide fewer benefits than what the consumer could obtain directly.
(1026.38(l)(7)(ii)(C))
Additional Information About This Loan: Adjustable
Payment (AP) Table – Section 1026.38(m) (Page 4 of the
Closing Disclosure)
1. Adjustable Payment (AP) Table. Determine whether the creditor provides the AP disclosure
required for the Loan Estimate under 1026.37(i). (1026.38(m))
Additional Information About This Loan: Adjustable
Interest Rate (AIR) Table – Section 1026.38(n) (Page 4 of
the Closing Disclosure)
1. Adjustable Interest Rate (AIR) Table. Determine whether the creditor provides the AIR
disclosures required for the Loan Estimate by 1026.37(j). (1026.38(n))
Loan Calculations – Section 1026.38(o) (Page 5 of the
Closing Disclosure)
1. Loan Calculations. Determine whether the creditor provides a separate table and accurately
discloses the following information (1026.38(o)):
a. Total of Payments. Expressed as a dollar amount, and a statement that the disclosure is
the total the consumer will have paid after making all payments of principal, interest,
mortgage insurance, and loan costs, as scheduled (1026.38(o)(1));
b. Finance Charge. Expressed as a dollar amount, and the statement “The dollar amount the
loan will cost you.” The finance charge and other disclosures affected by the disclosed
CFPB April 2015 TILA 40
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
finance charge (including the amount financed and the annual percentage rate) is
accurately calculated if the amount disclosed as the finance charge:
i. Is understated by no more than $100; or
ii. Is greater than the amount required to be disclosed. (1026.38(o)(2))
c. Amount Financed. Expressed as a dollar amount, and the following statement: “The loan
amount available after paying your up-front finance charge” (1026.38(o)(3));
d. Annual Percentage Rate (APR). Expressed as a percentage, with the following statement:
“Your costs over the loan term expressed as a rate. This is not your interest rate.”
(1026.38(o)(4));
e. Total Interest Percentage (TIP). Expressed as a percentage; with the following statement:
“The total amount of interest that you will pay over the loan term as a percentage of your
loan amount.” (1026.38(o)(5))
Other Disclosures – Section 1026.38(p) (Page 5 of the
Closing Disclosure)
1. Other Disclosures. Determine whether the creditor accurately provides the following
disclosures:
a. Appraisal. For transactions subject to 15 U.S.C. 1639h or 1691(e), as implemented in this
part or Regulation B, 12 CFR part 1002, respectively, under the subheading “Appraisal:”
(1026.38(p)(1))
i. If there was an appraisal of the property in connection with the loan, the creditor is
required to provide the consumer with a copy at no additional cost to the consumer at
least three days prior to consummation; (1026.38(p)(1)(i)) and
ii. If the consumer has not yet received a copy of the appraisal, the consumer should
contact the creditor using the information disclosed in the Closing Disclosure.
(1026.38(p)(1)(ii))
b. Contract Details. A statement that the consumer should refer to the appropriate loan
document and security instrument for information about nonpayment, what constitutes a
default under the legal obligation, circumstances under which the creditor may accelerate
the maturity of the obligation, and prepayment rebates and penalties. (1026.38(p)(2))
c. Liability after Foreclosure. A brief statement of whether, and the conditions under which,
the consumer may remain responsible for any deficiency after foreclosure under
applicable state law, a brief statement that certain protections may be lost if the consumer
refinances or incurs additional debt on the property, and a statement that the consumer
should consult an attorney for additional information. (1026.38(p)(3))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 41
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
d. Refinance. The statement required on the Loan Estimate by section 1026.37(m)(5) that
“Refinancing this loan will depend on your future financial situation, the property value,
and market conditions. You may not be able to refinance this loan.” (1026.38(p)(4))
e. Tax Deductions. A statement that, if the extension of credit exceeds the fair market value
of the property, the interest on the portion of the credit extension that is greater than the
fair market value of the property is not tax deductible for Federal income tax purposes
and a statement that the consumer should consult a tax adviser for further information.
(1026.38(p)(5))
f. Loan Acceptance. If the creditor does not provide a line for the consumer's signature, the
creditor must include with the other disclosures the same statement required in the Loan
Estimate that “You do not have to accept this loan because you have received this form or
signed a loan application.” This is the same requirement as in the Loan Estimate under
1026.37(n)(2). (1026.38(s)(2))
Questions Notice – Section 1026.38(q) (Page 5 of the
Closing Disclosure)
1. Questions. Determine whether the creditor provides a separate questions notice. The creditor
must include a prominent question mark, a statement directing the consumer to use the
contact information for questions, and a reference to CFPB’s website for more information
and to submit a complaint, and a link to www.consumerfinance.gov/mortgage-closing
(1026.38(q)(1)-(3)).
Contact Information – Section 1026.38(r) (Page 5 of the
Closing Disclosure)
1. Contact Information. Determine whether the creditor provides the required contact
information for each lender, mortgage broker, consumer's real estate broker, seller's real
estate broker, and settlement agent participating in the transaction; the name of the person,
address, NMLSR ID number, or if none, state and License ID; the name of the natural person
who is the primary contact for the consumer at each entity, identified as “Contact,” along
with that person’s Contact NMLS ID or Contact License ID, email address, and phone
number. (1026.38(r)(1)-(7))
Confirm Receipt – Section 1026.38(s) (Page 5 of the
Closing Disclosure)
1. Confirm Receipt. Determine whether, if the creditor chooses to provide a signature statement,
the creditor discloses, above the signature line, the statement “By signing, you are only
confirming that you have received this form. You do not have to accept this loan because you
have signed or received this form.” (1026.38(s)(1))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 42
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
NOTE: If the creditor does not provide a line for the consumer's signature, the creditor must
include the following statement, labeled “Loan Acceptance:” “You do not have to accept this
loan because you have received this form or signed a loan application.” (1026.38(s)(2)
Form of Disclosures – Section 1026.38(t)
1. Determine whether the creditor follows the format and content of form H-25, set forth in
appendix H, changes formatting only if there is an exception, including acceptable
modifications in appendix H for transactions without a seller, and complies with the
following rounding rules for dollar amounts and percentages:
a. Rounding - nearest dollar. The following dollar amounts are rounded to the nearest
whole dollar:
i. The dollar amounts for Loan Terms (required to be disclosed by section 1026.38(b))
that are required to be rounded by 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(A) when disclosed under
1026.37(b)(6) and (7) (i.e., adjustments after consummation and details about
prepayment penalty and balloon payments);
ii. The dollar amounts for projected payments or range of payments required by section
1026.38(c) that are required to be rounded by section 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(A) when
disclosed under section 1026.37(c)(1)(iii) (i.e., minimum and maximum amounts of
principal and interest for projected periodic payments or range of payments);
iii. The dollar amounts required to be disclosed by section 1026.38(e) (Alternative
Calculating Cash to Close table for transactions without a seller) and section
1026.38(i) (Calculating Cash to Close table) under the subheading “Loan Estimate;”
iv. The dollar amounts required to be disclosed by 1026.38(m) (adjustable payment
table); and
v. The dollar amounts required to be disclosed by 1026.38(c) (projected payments) that
are required to be rounded by 1026.37(o)(4)(i)(C) when disclosed under
1026.37(c)(2)(iv) (i.e., total monthly payment).
b. Percentages. The percentage amounts disclosed under 1026.38(b) (i.e., loan terms),
(f)(1)(i) (i.e., origination charges), (g)(2)(iii) (i.e., prepaids), (l)(3) (i.e., late payment), (n)
(i.e., adjustable interest rate table), and (o)(5)(i.e., total interest percentage or TIP) are not
rounded and are disclosed up to two or three decimal places. The percentage amount
required to be disclosed under 1026.38(o)(4) (APR) is not rounded and is disclosed up to
three decimal places. Amounts that are whole numbers are disclosed truncated at the
decimal point.
c. Loan amount. The dollar amount of the loan amount (required to be disclosed by
1026.38(b) as required by 1026.37(b)(1)) is disclosed as an unrounded number, except
CFPB April 2015 TILA 43
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
that if the amount is a whole number, then the amount disclosed is truncated at the
decimal point. (1026.38(t)(1)-(5))
Closed-End Transactions Not Subject to 1026.19(e) and (f)
– Forms Review and Timing Requirements
Closed-End Credit Disclosure Forms – for Transactions
Other Than Under 1026.19(e) and (f) - General
1. Determine that the disclosures are clear, conspicuous, and grouped together or segregated as
required, in a form the consumer may keep.
a. For loans subject to section 1026.18(s), the terms “Finance Charge” and “Annual
Percentage Rate” and corresponding rates or amounts should be more conspicuous than
other terms, except for the creditor’s identity. (1026.17(a)(2))
b. For reverse mortgages subject to 1024.33 in Regulation X, the disclosures required under
1026.33(b).
c. For private student loans, the term “Annual Percentage Rate” and corresponding rate
must be less conspicuous than the term “finance charge” and the corresponding amount,
as well as less conspicuous than the interest rate, the notice of the right to cancel, and
creditor’s identity. (1026.17(a)(2))
2. For a closed-end transaction not subject to section 1026.19(e) and (f), determine whether the
disclosures are accurately completed and include the following disclosures as applicable.
a. Identity of the creditor (1026.18(a))
b. Amount financed (1026.18(b))
c. Itemization of amount financed (1026.18(c))
d. Brief description of the APR (1026.18(e))
e. Variable rate information (1026.18(f)(1) or (2))
f. Payment schedule (1026.18(g))
g. Brief description of the total of payments (1026.18)(h))
h. Demand feature (1026.18(i))
i. Description of total sales price in a credit sale (1026.18(j))
j. Prepayment penalties or rebates (1026.18(k))
k. Late payment amount or percentage (1026.18(l))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 44
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
l. Description for security interest (1026.18(m))
m. Insurance conditions for finance charge exclusions (1026.4(d) and 1026.18(n))
n. Statement concerning certain security interest charges (1026.4(e) and 1026.18(o))
o. Statement referring to the contract (1026.18(p))
p. Statement regarding assumption of the note (1026.18(q))
q. Statement regarding required deposits (1026.18(r))
r. Interest rate and payment summary for mortgage transactions (1026.18(s))
3. Determine that for transactions other than transactions subject to 1026.19(e) and (f), the
creditor discloses the number, amounts, and timing of payments scheduled to repay the
obligation (other than for a transaction that is subject to section 1026.18(s)3. (1026.18(g))
4. For a closed-end transaction secured by real property or a dwelling (other than a transaction
subject to 1026.19(e) and (f)), determine that the creditor discloses the following information
about the interest rate and payments, as applicable (1026.18(s)):
a. Interest Rates
i. For a fixed-rate mortgage, the interest rate at consummation. (1026.18(s)(2)(i)(A))
ii. For an adjustable-rate or step-rate mortgage (1026.18(s)(2)(i)(B)):
A. The interest rate at consummation and the period of time until the first interest
rate adjustment may occur, labeled as the “introductory rate and monthly
payment;”
NOTE: As set forth in comment 18(s)-1, if periodic payments are not due monthly,
the creditor should use the appropriate term, such as “quarterly” or “annually.”
B. The maximum interest rate that may apply during the first five years after the date
on which the first regular periodic payment will be due and the earliest date on
which that rate may apply, labeled as “maximum during first five years;” and
C. The maximum interest rate that may apply during the life of the loan and the
earliest date on which that rate may apply, labeled as “maximum ever.”
iii. For a loan that provides for payment increases occurring without regard to an
interest rate adjustment4 (as described in section 1026.18(s)(3)(i)(B)), the interest rate
3
For example, home construction loans that are secured by real property or a dwelling are subject to §1026.18(s) and not
§1026.18 (g). See comment App. D-6 of Regulation Z.
4
Note: this category includes interest-only loans, as set forth in comment §1026.18(s)(2)(i)(C)-1.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 45
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
in effect at the time the first such payment increase is scheduled to occur and the date
on which the increase will occur, labeled as “first adjustment” if the loan is an
adjustable-rate mortgage or, otherwise, labeled as “first increase.”5
(1026.18(s)(2)(i)(C))
iv. For a negative amortization loan6 (1026.18(s)(2)(ii)):
A. The interest rate at consummation and, if it will adjust after consummation, the
length of time until it will adjust, and the label “introductory” or “intro;”
B. The maximum interest rate that could apply when the consumer must begin
making fully amortizing payments under the terms of the legal obligation;
C. If the minimum required payment will increase before the consumer must begin
making fully amortizing payments, the maximum interest rate that could apply at
the time of the first payment increase and the date the increase is scheduled to
occur; and
D. If a second increase in the minimum required payment may occur before the
consumer must begin making fully amortizing payments, the maximum interest
rate that could apply at the time of the second payment increase and the date the
increase is scheduled to occur.
v. Introductory rate for an amortizing adjustable-rate mortgage, if the interest rate at
consummation is less than the fully indexed rate, the following (placed in a box
directly beneath the table required by section 1026.18 (s)(1) of the regulation, in a
format substantially similar to Model Clause H–4(I) in the regulation’s appendix H):
A. The interest rate that applies at consummation and the period of time for which it
applies;
B. A statement that, even if market rates do not change, the interest rate will increase
at the first adjustment and a designation of the place in sequence of the month or
year, as applicable, of such rate adjustment (e.g., “in the third year”); and
C. The fully-indexed rate.
b. Payments for Amortizing Loans
5
Because model forms and clauses published by the CFPB are safe harbors, this rate may also be labeled “Maximum Ever,”
pursuant to §1026.18(s)(2)(i)((B)(3).
6
The term “negative amortization loan” means a loan, other than a reverse mortgage subject to section 1026.33 that provides for
a minimum periodic payment that covers only a portion of the accrued interest, resulting in negative amortization.
(1026.18(s)(7)(v))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 46
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
i. Principal and interest payments. If all periodic payments will be applied to accrued
interest and principal, for each interest rate disclosed under section 1026.18(s)(2)(i)
(1026.18(s)(3)(i)):
A. The corresponding periodic principal and interest payment, labeled as “principal
and interest;”
B. If the periodic payment may increase without regard to an interest rate
adjustment, the payment that corresponds to the first such increase and the earliest
date on which the increase could occur;
C. If an escrow account is established, an estimate of the amount of taxes and insurance,
including any mortgage insurance payable with each periodic payment; and
D. The sum of the amounts disclosed under sections 1026.18(s)(3)(i)(A) and (C) or
(s)(3)(i)(B) and (C), as applicable, labeled as “total estimated monthly payment.”
ii. Interest-only payments. If the loan is an interest-only loan, for each interest rate
disclosed under section 1026.18(s)(2)(i), the corresponding periodic payment and
(1026.18(s)(3)(ii)):
A. If the payment will be applied to only accrued interest, the amount applied to
interest, labeled as “interest payment,” and a statement that none of the payment
is being applied to principal;
B. If the payment will be applied to accrued interest and principal, an itemization of
the amount of the first such payment applied to accrued interest and to principal,
labeled as “interest payment” and “principal payment,” respectively;
C. The escrow information described in section 1026.18(s)(3)(i)(C); and
D. The sum of all amounts required to be disclosed under sections
1026.18(s)(3)(ii)(A) and (C) or (s)(3)(ii)(B) and (C), as applicable, labeled as
“total estimated monthly payment.”
iii. Payments for negative amortization loans. If the loan is a negative amortization loan
(1026.18(s)(4)):
A. The minimum periodic payment required until the first payment increase or
interest rate increase, corresponding to the interest rate disclosed under section
1026.18(s)(2)(ii)(A);
B. The minimum periodic payment that would be due at the first payment increase
and the second, if any, corresponding to the interest rates described in section
1026.18(s)(2)(ii)(C) and (D);
C. A statement that the minimum payment pays only some interest, does not repay
any principal, and will cause the loan amount to increase;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 47
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
D. The fully amortizing periodic payment amount at the earliest time when such a
payment must be made, corresponding to the interest rate disclosed under section
1026.18 (s)(2)(ii)(B); and
E. If applicable, in addition to the payments in sections 1026.18(s)(4)(i) and (ii), for
each interest rate disclosed under section 1026.18(s)(2)(ii), the amount of the fully
amortizing periodic payment, labeled as the “full payment option,” and a
statement that these payments pay all principal and all accrued interest.
NOTE: The information in sections 1026.18(s)(2)–(4) must be disclosed in the form
of a table with no more than five columns, and with headings and format substantially
similar to Model Clause H–4(E), H–4(F), H–4(G), or H–4(H) in appendix H of the
regulation. The table should contain only the information required in sections 1026.18
(s)(2)–(4), be placed in a prominent location, and be in a minimum 10-point font.
(1026.18(s)(1))
iv. Balloon payments. For loans with balloon payments (defined as a payment that is
more than two times a regular periodic payment) (1026.18(s)(5)):
A. Except as provided below, the balloon payment is disclosed separately from other
periodic payments disclosed in the table (i.e., is outside the table and in a manner
substantially similar to Model Clause H–4(J) in appendix H to the regulation);
B. If the balloon payment is scheduled to occur at the same time as another
payment required to be disclosed in the table, the balloon payment must be
disclosed in the table.
5. For a closed-end transaction secured by real property or a dwelling (other than a transaction
that is subject to 1026.19(e) and (f)) that is a negative amortization loan, determine that the
following information is disclosed (in close proximity to the table required in section
1026.18(s)(1), with headings, content, and format substantially similar to Model Clause H–
4(G) in appendix H to this part) (1026.18(s)(6)):
a. The maximum interest rate, the shortest period of time in which such interest rate could be
reached, the amount of estimated taxes and insurance included in each payment disclosed,
and a statement that the loan offers payment options, two of which are shown; and
b. The dollar amount of the increase in the loan’s principal balance if the consumer makes
only the minimum required payments for the maximum possible time and the earliest
date on which the consumer must begin making fully amortizing payments, assuming that
the maximum interest rate is reached at the earliest possible time.
6. For a closed-end transaction secured by real property or a dwelling (other than a transaction
that is subject to 1026.19(e) and (f)), determine that the creditor disclosed a statement that
there is no guarantee the consumer can refinance the transaction to lower the interest rate or
periodic payments. (1026.18(t)(1))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 48
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
NOTE: The statement required by section 1026.18(t)(1) should be in a form substantially
similar to Model Clause H–4(K) in appendix H to the regulation. (1026.18(t)(2))
7. Determine all variable rate loans (other than a transaction that is subject to 1026.19(e) and
(f)) with a maturity greater than one year, secured by a principal dwelling are given the
following disclosures at the time of application. (1026.19)
a. Consumer Handbook on Adjustable Rate Mortgages or substitute
b. Statement that interest rate payments and or terms can change
c. The index/formula and a source of information
d. Explanation of the interest rate/payment determination and margin
e. Statement that the consumer should ask for the current interest rate and margin
f. Statement that the interest rate is discounted, if applicable
g. Frequency of interest rate and payment changes
h. Rules relating to all changes
i. Either a historical example based on 15 years, or the initial rate and payment with a
statement that the periodic payment may substantially increase or decrease together with
a maximum interest rate and payment
j. Explanation of how to compute the loan payment, giving an example
k. Demand feature, if applicable
l. Statement of content and timing of adjustment notices
m. Statement that other variable rate loan program disclosures are available, if applicable
8. Determine that for any closed-end adjustable-rate mortgage (other than a transaction that is
subject to 1026.19(e) and (f)) with a maturity date greater than one year and secured by a
principal dwelling, the creditor, assignee, or servicer provides the following initial rate
adjustment disclosures (for disclosure timing requirements, see Timing Requirements
below): (1026.20(d)(2))
a. The date of the disclosure;
b. An explanation that under the terms of the consumer’s adjustable rate mortgage, the time
frame that the current rate has been in effect, when the current rate is scheduled to expire,
the effective date of the new rate, when additional future interest rate adjustments are
scheduled to occur and any other changes to loan terms, features, and options taking effect
on the same date, and how the rate change may affect the payment and other loan terms;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 49
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
c. A table explaining the current interest rate and payment, the new interest rate and
payment, and the date the first new payment is due;
NOTE: For interest-only and negative amortization adjustable-rate mortgages, the table
must include how the current and new rates and payment will be allocated to interest,
principal, and escrow (if applicable). See section 1026.20(d)(2)(iii)(C) for more on
payment allocation disclosure requirements.
d. An explanation of how the interest rate is determined, including the specific index or
formula used and a source of information about that index or formula, and the type and
amount of any adjustment, including a margin and an explanation that a margin is the
addition of a certain number of percentage points to the index;
e. Any limits on the interest rate or payment increases at each interest rate adjustment and
over the life of the loan (as applicable), including the extent to which such limits result in
the creditor, assignee, or servicer foregoing any increase in the interest rate and the
earliest date that such foregone interest rate increases may apply to future interest rate
adjustments, subject to those limits;
f. An explanation of how the new payment was determined, including the index or formula
used to determine the new interest rate;
g. Any adjustments to the index or formula used to determine the new payment, such as the
addition of a margin;
h. The expected loan balance on the date of the interest rate adjustment;
i. The remaining loan term expected on the date of the interest rate adjustment and any
changes to the term that may have occurred due to the interest rate change;
j. If an estimated rate payment is provided, a statement that another disclosure with the actual
interest rate will be provided to the consumer between two and four months prior to the
first payment at the adjusted level is due, and that the creditor is using an estimated rate;
k. If applicable, a statement that the new payment will not be allocated to pay loan principal
and will not reduce the loan balance. If the new payment will result in negative
amortization, a statement that the new payment will not be allocated to pay loan principal
and that only part of the interest will be paid, which will add to the loan balance. If the
new payment will result in negative amortization as a result of the interest rate
adjustment, the statement must set forth the payment required to fully amortize the
remaining balance at the new interest rate over the remainder of the loan term;
l. A statement indicating the circumstances under which any prepayment penalty may be
imposed, the time period during which it may be imposed, and a statement that the
consumer may contact the servicer for additional information, including the maximum
amount of the penalty that may be charged to the consumer;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 50
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
m. A telephone number of the creditor, assignee, or servicer to call if the consumer
anticipates not being able to make the new payment;
n. A statement listing alternatives that consumers may pursue if they anticipate not being
able to make the new payment;
o. A web address to access either the CFPB or the Department of Housing and Urban
Development’s (HUD) approved list of homeownership counselors and counseling
organizations, the HUD toll-free number to access the HUD list of homeownership
counselors and counseling organizations, and the Bureau website to access state housing
finance authorities’ contact information.
9. Determine that for any closed-end adjustable-rate mortgage (other than a transaction that is
subject to 1026.19(e) and (f)) with a maturity date greater than one year, secured by a
principal dwelling, the creditor, assignee, or servicer provides the following rate adjustment
disclosures for rate adjustments with a corresponding payment change (for disclosure timing
requirements see Timing Requirements below): (1026.20(c))
NOTE: A creditor, assignee or servicer subject to the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act
(FDCPA) that has received the consumer’s notification to cease communication pursuant to
FDCPA section 805(c) is exempt from this requirement.
a. An explanation that under the terms of the consumer’s adjustable rate mortgage, the time
frame that the current rate has been in effect is ending and the interest rate and payment
will change, the effective date of the new rate, when additional future interest rate
adjustments are scheduled to occur and any other changes to loan terms, features, and
options taking effect on the same date, such as the expiration of interest-only or payment-
option features; a table explaining the current interest rate and payment, the new interest
rate and payment, and the date the first new payment is due;
NOTE: For interest-only and negatively amortizing payments, the table must include how the
current and new rates and payment will be allocated to interest, principal, and escrow (if
applicable). See section 1026.20(d)(2)(iii)(C) for more on payment allocation disclosure
requirements.
b. An explanation of how the interest rate is determined, including the specific index or
formula used and a source of information about that index or formula, and the type and
amount of any adjustment, including a margin and an explanation that a margin is the
addition of a certain number of percentage points to the index, and any application of
previously foregone interest rate increases from past rate adjustments;
c. Any limits on the interest rate or payment increases at each interest rate adjustment and
over the life of the loan (as applicable), including the extent to which such limits result in
the creditor, assignee, or servicer foregoing any increase in the interest rate and the
earliest date that such foregone interest rate increases may apply to future interest rate
adjustments, subject to those limits;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 51
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
d. An explanation of how the new payment is determined, including the index or formula
used to determine the new interest rate;
e. Any adjustments to the index or formula used to determine the new payment, such as the
addition of a margin or the application of any previously foregone interest rate increases
from past interest rate adjustments;
f. The expected loan balance on the date of the interest rate adjustment;
g. The remaining loan term expected on the date of the interest rate adjustment and any
changes to the term that may have occurred due to the interest rate change;
h. If applicable, a statement that the new payment will not be allocated to pay loan principal
and will not reduce the loan balance. If the new payment will result in negative
amortization, a statement that the new payment will not be allocated to pay loan principal
and that only part of the interest will be paid, which will add to the loan balance. If the
new payment will result in negative amortization as a result of the interest rate
adjustment, the statement must set forth the payment required to fully amortize the
remaining balance at the new interest rate over the remainder of the loan term;
i. A statement indicating the circumstances under which any prepayment penalty may be
imposed, the time period during which it may be imposed, and a statement that the
consumer may contact the servicer for additional information, including the maximum
amount of the penalty that may be charged to the consumer;
NOTE: Model and sample disclosures H-4(D)(1) through (4) containing all necessary
information can be found in appendix H. The disclosures required under section 1026.20(c)
and (d) generally should be in the form of a table and in the same order as, and with headings
and format substantially similar to, the model disclosures (1026.20(c)(3) and (d)(3)).
NOTE: When examining a creditor, an assignee, or a servicer that continues to own the loan,
if the entity states that another entity has the obligation to provide the disclosures, examiners
should determine whether the entity takes steps to ensure that the other party (the creditor,
assignee, or servicer, as applicable) is complying with the obligation to provide the
disclosures.
High-Cost Mortgages – Section 1026.32
1. Determine that the disclosures required for high-cost mortgage transactions (1026.32) clearly
and conspicuously include the items below. (1026.32(c), see Form H-16 in appendix H)
a. The required statement “you are not required to complete this agreement merely because
you have received these disclosures or have signed a loan application. If you obtain this
loan, the lender will have a mortgage on your home. You could lose your home, and any
money you have put into it, if you do not meet your obligations under the loan.”
b. The APR.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 52
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
c. Amount of the regular monthly (or other periodic) payment and the amount of any
balloon payment. The regular payment should include amounts for voluntary items, such
as credit life insurance or debt-cancellation coverage, only if the consumer has previously
agreed to the amount (See the commentary to section 1026.32(c)(3)).
d. Statement that the interest rate may increase and monthly payment may increase, and the
amount of the single maximum monthly payment, based on the maximum interest rate
allowed under the contract, if applicable.
e. The amount borrowed. For a closed-end mortgage, the amount borrowed is the total
amount borrowed, as reflected by the face amount of the note; and where the amount
borrowed includes premiums or other charges for optional credit insurance or debt-
cancellation coverage (grouped together with the amount borrowed), that fact shall be
stated. For an open-end credit plan, the amount borrowed is the credit limit for the plan
when the account is opened.
Escrow Cancellation Notice – Section 1026.20(e)(1)
1. Escrow cancellation notice. For a closed-end loan secured by a first lien on real property or a
dwelling (other than a reverse mortgage) where an escrow account (as defined under
1024.17(b)) is cancelled, determine whether: (1026.20(e))
a. The creditor or servicer provided an Escrow Closing Notice with the following clearly
and conspicuously disclosed: (1026.20(e)(1)
i. A statement informing the consumer of the date on which the consumer will no
longer have an escrow account;
ii. A statement that an escrow account may also be called an impound or trust account;
iii. A statement of the reason why the escrow account will be closed;
iv. A statement that without an escrow account, the consumer must pay all property
costs, such as taxes and homeowner's insurance, directly, possibly in one or two large
payments a year; and
v. A table, titled “Cost to you,” that contains an itemization of the amount of any fee the
creditor or servicer imposes on the consumer in connection with the closure of the
consumer's escrow account, labeled “Escrow Closing Fee,” and a statement that the
fee is for closing the escrow account; (1026.20(e)(2)(i))
vi. Information under the reference “In the future” that includes: (1026.20(e)(2)(ii))
A. A statement of the consequences if the consumer fails to pay property costs,
including the actions that a state or local government may take if property taxes
are not paid and the actions the creditor or servicer may take if the consumer does
not pay some or all property costs, such as adding amounts to the loan balance,
CFPB April 2015 TILA 53
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
adding an escrow account to the loan, or purchasing a property insurance policy
on the consumer's behalf that may be more expensive and provide fewer benefits
than a policy that the consumer could obtain directly; (1026.20(e)(2)(ii)(A))
B. A statement with a telephone number that the consumer can use to request
additional information about the cancellation of the escrow account;
(1026.20(e)(2)(ii)(B))
C. A statement of whether the creditor or servicer offers the option of keeping the
escrow account open and, as applicable, a telephone number the consumer can use
to request that the account be kept open; and (1026.20(e)(2)(ii)(C))
D. A statement of whether there is a cut-off date by which the consumer can request
that the account be kept open. (1026.20(e)(2)(ii)(D))
2. Form. The disclosure meets the formatting requirements of section 1026.20(e)(4) and is
substantially similar to model form H-29 in appendix H. (1026.20(e)(4))
3. Timing. The creditor or servicer ensures that the consumer receives the Escrow Closing
Notice in the following time periods:
i. If the cancellation is upon the consumer’s request, no later than three business days
before the closure of the consumer’s escrow account; (1026.20(e)(5)(i))
ii. If cancellation is other than upon the consumer’s request, no later than 30 business
days before the closure of the consumer’s escrow account. (1026.20(e)(5)(ii))
NOTE: If the disclosures are not provided in person, the consumer is considered to have
received the disclosures three business days after they are delivered or placed in the mail.
(1026.20(e)(5)(iii))
Notice of Transfer – Section 1026.39
1. For any open-end loan secured by a principal dwelling or for any closed-end mortgage loan
secured by a dwelling or real property that was sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred to the
covered person, determine that the covered person notifies the borrower clearly and
conspicuously in writing, in a form that the consumer may keep of such transfer, including
(1026.39):
a. An identification of the loan that was sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred;
b. The name, address, and telephone number of the covered person who owns the mortgage
loan;
c. The date of transfer (either the date of acquisition recognized in the books and records of
the covered person or that of the transferring party) identified by the covered person;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 54
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
d. The name, address, and telephone number of an agent or party having authority, on
behalf of the covered person, to receive notice of the right to rescind and resolve issues
concerning the consumer’s payments on the mortgage loan;
e. Where transfer of ownership of the debt to the covered person is or may be recorded in
public records or, alternatively, that the transfer of ownership has not been recorded in
public records at the time the disclosure is provided; and,
f. At the option of the covered person, any other relevant information regarding the
transaction.
g. If there are multiple covered persons, contact information for each of them, unless one of
them has been authorized to receive the consumer’s notice of the right to rescind and
resolve issues concerning the consumer’s payments on the loan.
NOTE: This notice of sale or transfer must be provided for any consumer credit transaction
that is secured by the principal dwelling of a consumer. This notification is required of the
covered person even if the loan servicer remains the same. In addition, if more than one
consumer is liable on the obligation, the covered person may mail or deliver the disclosure
notice to any consumer who is primarily liable. And, if an acquisition involves multiple
covered persons who each acquire a partial interest in the loan pursuant to separate and
unrelated agreements, each covered person has a duty to ensure that disclosures related to its
acquisition are accurate and provided in a timely manner unless an exception in section
1026.39(c) applies. The parties may, but are not required to, provide a single notice that
satisfies the timing and content requirements applicable to each covered person.
(Commentary 1026.39(b)(5)–2)
Private Education Loans – Section 1026.46 – 1026.48
1. For private education loans subject to Subpart F, ensure that the required disclosures are
accurate (1026.47) and contain the following information:
a. Application or solicitation disclosures disclose the following:
i. Interest rate, including:
A. Rate or range, and if the rate depends in part on a determination of the borrower’s
creditworthiness or other factors, a statement to that effect;
B. Whether rate is fixed or variable;
C. If rate may increase after consummation, any limitations, or lack thereof, and if
the limitation is imposed by law, that fact. Also, the creditor must state that the
consumer’s actual rate may be higher or lower than that disclosed, if applicable;
and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 55
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
D. Whether the rate will typically be higher if the loan is not co-signed or
guaranteed.
ii. Fees and default or late payment costs.
iii. Repayment terms, including:
A. Term of the loan, which is the period during which regularly scheduled payments
of principal and interest will be due.
B. Deferral options, or if consumer does not have the option to defer, that fact.
C. For each available deferral option applicable, information as to:
1) Whether interest will accrue during deferral period; and
2) If interest accrues, whether payment of interest may be deferred and added to
the principal balance; and
D. A statement that, if the consumer files bankruptcy, the consumer may still be
required to repay the loan.
iv. Cost estimates, based on an example of the total cost of the loan, calculated using:
A. The highest interest rate and including all applicable finance charges,
B. An amount financed of $10,000, or $5,000, if the creditor offers loans less than
$10,000; and
C. Calculated for each payment option.
v. Eligibility (e.g., any age or school enrollment eligibility requirements).
vi. Alternatives to private education loans, including:
A. A statement that the consumer may qualify for federal student loans,
B. The interest rates available for each program available under title IV of the Higher
Education Act of 1965, and whether the rate is variable or fixed;
C. A statement that the consumer may obtain additional information regarding
student federal financial assistance from his school or U.S. Department of
Education, including an appropriate website; and
D. A statement that a covered educational institution may have school specific
educational loan benefits and terms not detailed in the loan disclosure forms.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 56
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
vii. A statement that if the loan is approved, that the loan will be available for 30 days and
the terms will not change, except for changes to the interest rate in the case of a
variable rate and other changes permitted by law.
viii. A statement that before consummation, the borrower must complete a self-
certification form obtained from the student’s institution of higher education.
b. For approval disclosures, the following information is required under section 1026.47(b):
i. Interest rate, information, including:
A. Interest rate applicable to the loan
B. Whether the interest rate is variable or fixed; and
C. If the interest rate may increase after consummation, any limitations on the rate
adjustments, or lack thereof.
ii. Fees and default or late payment costs, including:
A. An itemization of the fees or range of fees required to obtain the loan; and
B. Any fees, changes to the interest rate, and adjustments to principal based on the
consumer’s defaults or late payments.
iii. Repayment terms, including:
A. Principal amount;
B. Term of the loan;
C. A description of the payment deferral option chosen by the consumer, if
applicable, and any other payment deferral options that the consumer may elect at
a later time;
D. Any payments required while the student is enrolled at the educational institution,
based on the deferral option chosen by the consumer;
E. Amount of any unpaid interest that will accrue while the student is enrolled in
school, based upon the deferral option chosen by the consumer;
F. A statement that if the consumer files for bankruptcy, that the consumer may still
be required to pay back the loan;
G. An estimate of the total amount of payments calculated based upon:
1) The interest rate applicable to the loan (compliance with section 1026.18(h)
constitutes compliance with this requirement);
CFPB April 2015 TILA 57
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
2) The maximum possible rate of interest for the loan, or, if a maximum rate
cannot be determined, a rate of 25 percent.
3) If a maximum rate cannot be determined, the estimate of the total amount for
repayment must include a statement that there is no maximum rate and that
the total amount for repayment disclosed is an estimate.
H. The maximum monthly payment based on the maximum rate of interest for the
loan, or, if a maximum rate of interest cannot be determined, a rated of 25
percent. If a maximum cannot be determined, a statement that there is no
maximum rate and that the monthly payment amount disclosed is an estimate and
will be higher if the applicable interest rate increases.
iv. Alternatives to private education loans, including:
A. A statement that the consumer may qualify for federal student loans,
B. The interest rates available for each program available under title IV of the Higher
Education Act of 1965, and whether the rate is variable or fixed; and
C. A statement that the consumer may obtain additional information regarding
student federal financial assistance from his school or U.S. Department of
Education, including an appropriate website.
v. A statement that the consumer may accept the terms of the loan until the acceptance
period under section 1026.48(c)(1) has expired. The statement must include:
A. The specific date on which the acceptance period expires, based on the date upon
which the consumer receives the disclosures required under this subsection for the
loan;
B. The method or methods by which the consumer may communicate the acceptance
(written, oral, or by electronic means; and
C. A statement that except for changes to the interest rate and other changes
permitted by law, the rates and the terms of the loan may not be changed by the
creditor during the 30-day acceptance period.
c. After the consumer has accepted the loan in accordance with section 1026.48(c)(1),
final disclosures must disclose the information required under section 1026.47(c) and
the following:
i. Interest rate, including:
A. Interest rate applicable to the loan
B. Whether the interest rate is variable or fixed; and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 58
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
C. If the interest rate may increase after consummation, any limitations on the rate
adjustments, or lack thereof.
ii. Fees and default or late payment costs, including:
A. An itemization of the fees or range of fees required to obtain the loan; and
B. Any fees, changes to the interest rate, and adjustments to principal based on the
consumer’s defaults or late payments.
iii. Repayment terms, including:
A. Principal amount;
B. Term of the loan;
C. A description of the payment deferral option chosen by the consumer, if
applicable, and any other payment deferral options that the consumer may elect at
a later time;
D. Any payments required while the student is enrolled at the educational institution,
based on the deferral option chosen by the consumer;
E. Amount of any unpaid interest that will accrue while the student is enrolled in
school, based upon the deferral option chosen by the consumer;
F. A statement that if the consumer files for bankruptcy, that the consumer may still
be required to pay back the loan;
G. An estimate of the total amount of payments calculated based upon:
1) The interest rate applicable to the loan (compliance with section 1026.18(h)
constitutes compliance with this requirement);
2) The maximum possible rate of interest for the loan, or, if a maximum rate
cannot be determined, a rate of 25 percent;
3) If a maximum rate cannot be determined, the estimate of the total amount for
repayment must include a statement that there is no maximum rate and that
the total amount for repayment disclosed is an estimate.
H. The maximum monthly payment based on the maximum rate of interest for the
loan, or, if a maximum rate of interest cannot be determined, a rated of 25
percent. If a maximum cannot be determined, a statement that there is no
maximum rate and that the monthly payment amount disclosed is an estimate and
will be higher if the applicable interest rate increases.
iv. In a text more conspicuous than any other required disclosure, except for the finance
charge, the interest rate, and the creditor’s identify the following disclosures:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 59
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
A. A statement that the consumer has the right to cancel the loan, without penalty, at
any time before the midnight of the third business day following the date on
which the consumer receives the final loan disclosures. The statement must
include the specific date on which the cancellation period expires and that the
consumer may cancel by that date. (1026.47(c)(4)(i))
B. A statement that the loan proceeds will not be disbursed until the cancellation
period expires. (1026.47(c)(4)(ii))
C. The method or methods by which the consumer may cancel; (1026.47(c)(4)(ii))
and
D. If the creditor permits cancellation by mail, the statement specifying that the
consumer’s mailed request will be deemed timely if placed in the mail not later
than the cancellation date specified on the disclosures. (1026.47(c)(4)(ii))
Open-End Credit Forms Review Procedures
1. Determine that the creditor made the disclosures clearly and conspicuously. (1026.5(a))
2. Determine that the creditor made the applicable disclosures in writing, in a form that the
consumer may keep, except (1026.5(a)(1)(ii)):
a. The following disclosures need not be written: Disclosures under section 1026.6(b)(3) of
charges that are imposed as part of an open-end (not home-secured) plan that are not
required to be disclosed under section 1026.6(b)(2) and related disclosures of charges
under section 1026.9(c)(2)(iii)(B); disclosures under section 1026.9(c)(2)(vi); disclosures
under section 1026.9(d) when a finance charge is imposed at the time of the transaction;
and disclosures under section 1026.56(b)(1)(i).
b. The following disclosures need not be in a retainable form: Disclosures that need not be
written under paragraph 1026.5(a)(1)(ii)(A) of this section; the alternative summary
billing-rights statement under section 1026.9(a)(2); the credit and charge card renewal
disclosures required under section 1026.9(e); the payment requirements under section
1026.10(b), except as provided in section 1026.7(b)(13); ; home-equity disclosures under
section 1026.40(d); and disclosures for credit and charge card applications and
solicitations under section 1026.60.
c. The disclosures required by this subpart may be provided to the consumer in electronic
form, subject to compliance with the consumer consent and other applicable provisions of
the Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (E-Sign Act) (15 U.S.C.
7001 et seq.). The disclosures required by sections 1026.60, 1026.40, and 1026.16 may
be provided to the consumer in electronic form without regard to the consumer consent or
other provisions of the E-Sign Act in the circumstances set forth in those sections.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 60
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
3. Determine that the terminology used in providing the disclosures required by section 1026.5
is consistent. (1026.5(a)(2)(i))
4. Determine that, for home-equity plans subject to section 1026.40, the terms finance charge
and annual percentage rate (APR), when required to be disclosed with a corresponding
amount or percentage rate, shall be more conspicuous than any other required disclosure. The
terms need not be more conspicuous when used for periodic statement disclosures under
section 1026.7(a)(4) and for advertisements under section 1026.16. (1026.5(a)(2)(ii))
5. Determine that, if disclosures are required to be presented in a tabular format pursuant to
section 1026.5(a)(3), that the term penalty APR shall be used, as applicable.
(1026.5(a)(2)(iii))
NOTE: The term penalty APR need not be used in reference to the annual percentage rate
that applies with the loss of a promotional rate, assuming the annual percentage rate that
applies is not greater than the annual percentage rate that would have applied at the end of
the promotional period; or if the annual percentage rate that applies with the loss of a
promotional rate is a variable rate, the annual percentage rate is calculated using the same
index and margin as would have been used to calculate the annual percentage rate that would
have applied at the end of the promotional period. If credit insurance or debt cancellation or
debt suspension coverage is required as part of the plan, the term required shall be used and
the program shall be identified by its name. If an annual percentage rate is required to be
presented in a tabular format pursuant to paragraph (a)(3)(i) or (a)(3)(iii) of this section, the
term fixed, or a similar term, may not be used to describe such rate unless the creditor also
specifies a time period that the rate will be fixed and the rate will not increase during that
period, or if no such time period is provided, the rate will not increase while the plan is open.
Credit and Charge Card Application and Solicitation
Disclosures – Section 1026.60
1. Determine that the credit card solicitation or application disclosures were made clearly and
conspicuously on or with a solicitation or an application. (1026.60)
2. For the disclosures in sections 1026.60(b)(1) through (5) (except for (b)(1)(iv)(B) and (b)(7)
through (15), determine that the creditor made the disclosures required for sections
1026.60(c), (d)(2), (e)(1) and (f) in the form of a table with headings, content, and format
substantially similar to the applicable tables found in G-10 in appendix G. (1026.60(a)(2)(i))
3. Determine that the table required by section 1026.60(a)(2)(i) contains only the information
required or permitted by that section. If the creditor provides other information, determine
that such information appears outside the table. (1026.60(a)(2)(ii))
4. Determine that the disclosures required by section 1026.60(b)(1)(iv)(B), (b)(1)(iv)(C), and
(b)(6) are placed directly beneath the table required by section 1026.60(a)(2)(i).
(1026.60(a)(2)(iii))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 61
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
5. When a tabular format is required, determine that the following disclosures are disclosed in
bold text (1026.60(a)(2)(iv)):
a. Annual percentage rate required to be disclosed pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this
section,
b. Introductory rate required to be disclosed pursuant to paragraph (b)(1)(ii) of this section,
c. Rate that will apply after a premium initial rate expires required to be disclosed under
paragraph (b)(1)(iii) of this section, and
d. Fee or percentage amounts or maximum limits on fee amounts required to be disclosed
pursuant to paragraphs (b)(2), (b)(4), (b)(8) through (b)(13).
NOTE: Bold text shall not be used for the amount of any periodic fee disclosed pursuant to
paragraph (b)(2) of this section that is not an annualized amount, and other APRs or fee
amounts disclosed in the table. (1026.60(a)(2)(iv))
6. Determine that the card issuer discloses, on or with an solicitation or application:
(1026.60(b))
a. Annual percentage rate. Each periodic rate that may be used to compute the finance
charge on an outstanding balance for purchases, a cash advance, or a balance transfer,
expressed as an annual percentage rate. When more than one rate applies for a category
of transactions, determine that the range of balances to which each rate is applicable is
also disclosed. (1026.60(b)(1))
NOTE: The APR for purchases disclosed pursuant to section 1026.60(b)(1) shall be in at least
16-point type, except for the following: Oral disclosures of the annual percentage rate for
purchases; or a penalty rate that may apply upon the occurrence of one or more specific events.
i. Variable rate information. If a rate is a variable rate, determine that the card issuer
discloses the fact that the rate may vary and how the rate is determined. Determine
that the card issuer identifies the type of index or formula that is used in setting the
rate. Determine that the value of the index and the amount of the margin that are used
to calculate the variable rate are not disclosed in the table. Determine further that any
applicable limitations on rate increases are not included in the table.
(1026.60(b)(1)(i))
ii. Discounted initial rate. If the initial rate is an introductory rate, determine that the
card issuer discloses in the table the introductory rate, the time period during which
the introductory rate will remain in effect, and the term “introductory” or “intro” in
immediate proximity to the introductory rate. Determine further that the card issuer
discloses, as applicable, either the variable or fixed rate that would otherwise apply to
the account. (1026.60(b)(1)(ii))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 62
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
iii. Premium initial rate. If the initial rate is temporary and is higher than the rate that
will apply after the temporary rate expires, determine that the card issuer discloses the
premium initial rate and the time period during which the premium initial rate will
remain in effect. Determine that the premium initial rate for purchases is in at least
16-point type. Determine that the issuer discloses in the table the rate that will apply
after the premium initial rate expires, in at least 16-point type. (1026.60(b)(1)(iii))
iv. Penalty rates. Except as for provided introductory rate or employee preferential rate
requirements (discussed below), if a rate may increase as a penalty for one or more
events specified in the account agreement, such as a late payment or an extension of
credit that exceeds the credit limit, determine that the card issuer discloses the
increased rate that may apply, a brief description of the event or events that may
result in the increased rate, and a brief description of how long the increased rate will
remain in effect. (1026.60(b)(1)(iv)(A))
v. Introductory rate. If the issuer discloses an introductory rate in the table or in any
written or electronic promotional materials accompanying applications or solicitations
(and subject to paragraph (c) or (e) of section 1026.60), determine that the issuer
briefly discloses, directly beneath the table, the circumstances, if any, under which the
introductory rate may be revoked, and the type of rate that will apply after the
introductory rate is revoked. (1026.60(b)(1)(iv)(B))
vi. Employee preferential rates. If the issuer discloses in the table a preferential APR for
which only employees of the card issuer, employees of a third party, or other
individuals with similar affiliations with the card issuer or third party are eligible,
determine that the issuer briefly discloses directly beneath the table the circumstances
under which such preferential rate may be revoked and the rate that will apply after
such preferential rate is revoked. (1026.60(b)(1)(iv)(C))
vii. Rates that depend on consumer’s creditworthiness. If a rate cannot be determined at
the time disclosures are given because the rate depends, at least in part, on a later
determination of the consumer’s creditworthiness, determine that the card issuer
discloses the specific rates or the range of rates that could apply and a statement that
the rate for which the consumer may qualify at account opening will depend on the
consumer’s creditworthiness, and other factors if applicable. (1026.60(b)(1)(v))
NOTE: If the rate that depends, at least in part, on a later determination of the consumer’s
creditworthiness is a penalty rate, as described in (b)(1)(iv), the card issuer at its option
may disclose the highest rate that could apply, instead of disclosing the specific rates or
the range of rates that could apply. (1026.60(b)(1)(v))
viii. APRs that vary by state. Determine that the card issuer does not list annual
percentage rates for multiple states in the table. Note, however, that issuers imposing
annual percentage rates that vary by state may, at the issuer’s option, disclose in the
table: the specific annual percentage rate applicable to the consumer’s account; or
CFPB April 2015 TILA 63
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
the range of the annual percentage rates, if the disclosure includes a statement that
the annual percentage rate varies by state and refers the consumer to a disclosure
provided with the table where the annual percentage rate applicable to the
consumer’s account is disclosed. (1026.60(b)(1)(vi))
b. Fees for issuance or availability. Determine that the card issuer discloses any annual or
other periodic fee, expressed as an annualized amount, or any other fee that may be
imposed for the issuance or availability of a credit or charge card, including any fee based
on account activity or inactivity. (1026.60(b)(2))
c. Fixed finance charge; minimum interest charge. Determine that the creditor discloses any
fixed finance charge that could be imposed during a billing cycle, as well as a brief
description of that charge. Determine that the creditor discloses any minimum interest
charge if it exceeds $1.00 that could be imposed during a billing cycle, and a brief
description of the charge. (1026.60(b)(3))
d. Transaction charge. Determine that the creditor discloses any transaction charge imposed
for the use of the card for purchases. (1026.60(b)(4))
e. Grace period. Determine that the issuer discloses the date by which or the period within
which any credit extended for purchases may be repaid without incurring a finance
charge due to a periodic interest rate and any conditions on the availability of the grace
period. If no grace period is provided, determine that this fact is disclosed. In disclosing
in the tabular format a grace period that applies to all types of purchases, determine that
the issuer uses the phrase “How to Avoid Paying Interest on Purchases” as the heading
for the row describing the grace period. If a grace period is not offered on all types of
purchases, in disclosing this fact in the tabular format, determine that the issuer uses the
phrase “Paying Interest” as the heading for the row describing this fact.
NOTE: If the length of the grace period varies, the card issuer may disclose the range of
days, the minimum number of days, or the average number of days in the grace period, if the
disclosure is identified as a range, minimum, or average. (1026.60(b)(5))
f. Balance computation method. Determine that the creditor disclosed the name of the
balance computation method that is used to determine the balance on which the finance
charge is computed, or an explanation of the method used if it is not listed. In
determining which balance computation method to disclose, the creditor should have
assumed that the credit extended will not be repaid within any grace period.
(1026.60(b)(6))
NOTE: Disclosures required by section 1026.60(b)(6) must be placed directly beneath the
table.
g. Statement on charge card payments. Determine that the creditor discloses a statement
that charges incurred by use of the charge card are due when the periodic statement is
received. (1026.60(b)(7))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 64
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
h. Cash advance fee. Determine that the creditor disclosed any fee imposed for an extension
of credit in the form of cash or its equivalent. (1026.60(b)(8))
i. Late payment fee. Determine that the creditor disclosed any fee imposed for a late
payment. (1026.60(b)(9))
j. Over-the-limit fee. Determine that the creditor disclosed any fee imposed for exceeding
the credit limit. (1026.60(b)(10))
k. Balance transfer fee. Determine that the creditor disclosed any fee imposed to transfer a
balance. (1026.60(b)(11))
l. Returned payment fee. Determine that the creditor disclosed any fee imposed for a
returned payment. (1026.60(b)(12))
m. Required insurance, debt cancellation, or debt suspension coverage. Determine that the
fee imposed required insurance, debt cancellation or suspension coverage is disclosed if
the insurance, debt cancellation or coverage is required as part of the plan.
(1026.60(b)(13))
n. Available credit. Determine whether total of required fees for the issuance or availability
of credit and/or security deposit debited to the account at account opening equal or
exceed 15 percent of minimum credit limit for the account. If so, determine that the
creditor disclosed, as applicable, the available credit remaining after the fees and/or
security deposit are debited to the account. (1026.60(b)(14))
o. Website reference. For issuers of credit cards that are not charge cards, determine that the
creditor disclosed a reference to the website established by the Consumer Financial
Protection Bureau (CFPB) and a statement that the consumers may obtain on the website
information about shopping for and using credit cards. (1026.60(b)(15))
Requirements for Home Equity Plans – Section 1026.40
1. Determine that the following home equity disclosures were made clearly and conspicuously,
at the time of application. (1026.40)
a. Home equity brochure
b. Statement that the consumer should retain a copy of the disclosure
c. Statement of the time the specific terms are available
d. Statement that terms are subject to change before the plan opens
e. Statement that the consumer may receive a full refund of all fees
f. Statement that the consumer’s dwelling secures the credit
CFPB April 2015 TILA 65
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
g. Statement that the consumer could lose the dwelling
h. Creditors right to change, freeze, or terminate the account
i. Statement that information about conditions for adverse action are available upon request
j. Payment terms including the length of the draw and repayment periods, how the
minimum payment is determined, the timing of payments, and an example based on
$10,000 and a recent APR
k. A recent APR imposed under the plan and a statement that the rate does not include costs
other than interest (fixed rate plans only)
l. Itemization of all fees paid to creditor
m. Estimate of any fees payable to third parties to open the account and a statement that the
consumer may receive a good faith itemization of third-party fees
n. Statement regarding negative amortization, as applicable
o. Transaction requirements
p. Statement that the consumer should consult a tax advisor regarding the deductibility of
interest and charges under the plan
q. For variable rate home equity plans, disclose the following:
i. That the APR, payment, or term may change
ii. The APR excludes costs other than interest
iii. Identify the index and its source
iv. How the APR will be determined
v. Statement that the consumer should request information on the current index value,
margin, discount, premium, or APR
vi. Statement that the initial rate is discounted and the duration of the discount, if
applicable
vii. Frequency of APR changes
viii. Rules relating to changes in the index, APR, and payment amount
ix. Lifetime rate cap and any annual caps, or a statement that there is no annual limitation
x. The minimum payment requirement, using the maximum APR, and when the
maximum APR may be imposed
CFPB April 2015 TILA 66
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
xi. A historical example, based on a $10,000 balance, reflecting all significant plan terms
xii. Statement that rate information will be provided on or with each periodic statement.
2. For home-equity plans subject to section 1026.40, determine that the terms finance charge
and annual percentage rate, when required to be disclosed with a corresponding amount or
percentage rate, are more conspicuous than any other required disclosure.
NOTE: The terms need not be more conspicuous when used for periodic statement
disclosures under section 1026.7(a)(4) and for advertisements under section 1026.16.
(1026.5(a)(2)(ii))
Account Opening Initial Disclosures – Section 1026.6
1. The following requirements apply only to home-equity plans subject to the requirements of
section 1026.40. Determine that the creditor discloses, as applicable (1026.6(a)):
a. Finance charge. The circumstances under which a finance charge will be imposed and an
explanation of how it will be determined, including: a statement of when finance charges
begin to accrue, and an explanation of whether or not any time period exists within which
any credit extended may be repaid without incurring a finance charge; a disclosure of
each periodic rate that may be used to compute the finance charge, the range of balances
to which it is applicable, and the corresponding annual percentage rate; an explanation of
the method used to determine the balance on which the finance charge may be computed;
and, an explanation of how the amount of any finance charge will be determined,
including a description of how any finance charge other than the periodic rate will be
determined. (1026.6(a)(1))
If a creditor offers a variable-rate plan, determine that the creditor discloses: the
circumstances under which the rate(s) may increase; any limitations on the increase; and
the effect(s) of an increase. When different periodic rates apply to different types of
transactions, determine that the types of transactions to which the periodic rates shall
apply shall also be disclosed. (1026.6(a)(1))
b. Other charges. The amount of any charge other than a finance charge that may be
imposed as part of the plan, or an explanation of how the charge will be determined.
(1026.6(a)(2))
c. Home-equity plan information. The following disclosures, as applicable (1026.6(a)(3)):
i. A statement of the conditions under which the creditor may take certain action, as
described in section 1026.40(d)(4)(i), such as terminating the plan or changing the
terms.
ii. The payment information described in section 1026.40(d)(5)(i) and (ii) for both the
draw period and any repayment period.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 67
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
iii. A statement that negative amortization may occur as described in section
1026.40(d)(9).
iv. A statement of any transaction requirements as described in section 1026.40(d)(10).
v. A statement regarding the tax implications as described in section 1026.40(d)(11).
vi. A statement that the annual percentage rate imposed under the plan does not include
costs other than interest as described in section 1026.40(d)(6) and (d)(12)(ii).
vii. The variable-rate disclosures described in section 1026.40(d)(12)(viii), (d)(12)(x),
(d)(12)(xi), and (d)(12)(xii), as well as the disclosure described in section
1026.40(d)(5)(iii), unless the disclosures provided with the application were in a form
the consumer could keep and included a representative payment example for the
category of payment option chosen by the consumer.
d. Security interests. The fact that the creditor has or will acquire a security interest in the
property purchased under the plan, or in other property identified by item or type.
(1026.6(a)(4))
e. Statement of billing rights. A statement that outlines the consumer’s rights and the
creditor’s responsibilities under sections 1026.12(c) and 1026.13 and that is substantially
similar to the statement found in Model Form G–3 or, at the creditor’s option, G–3(A), in
appendix G to this part. (1026.6(a)(5))
2. For open-end (not home-secured) plans determine that the creditor provided the account-
opening disclosures specified in section 1026.6(b)(2)(i) through (b)(2)(v) (except for section
1026.6 (b)(2)(i)(D)(2) and section 1026.6 (b)(2)(vii) through (b)(2)(xiv) in the form of a table
with the headings, content, and format substantially similar to any of the applicable tables in
G–17 in appendix G. (1026.6(b)(1))
3. For open-end (not home-secured) plans, determine that the following disclosures are
disclosed in bold text (1026.6(b)(1)(i)):
a. Any APR required to be disclosed pursuant to section 1026.6(b)(2)(i);
b. Any introductory rate permitted to be disclosed pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(i)(B) or
required to be disclosed under paragraph (b)(2)(i)(F) of this section;
c. Any rate that will apply after a premium initial rate expires permitted to be disclosed
pursuant to paragraph (b)(2)(i)(C) or required to be disclosed pursuant to paragraph
(b)(2)(i)(F); and
d. Any fee or percentage amounts or maximum limits on fee amounts disclosed pursuant to
paragraphs (b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iv), (b)(2)(vii) through (b)(2)(xii).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 68
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
4. Determine that bold text is not used for: The amount of any periodic fee disclosed pursuant to
paragraph (b)(2) of this section that is not an annualized amount; and other annual percentage
rates or fee amounts disclosed in the table. (1026.6(b)(1)(i))
5. Determine that only the information required or permitted by section 1026.6 (b)(2)(i) through
(b)(2)(v) (except for (b)(2)(i)(D)(2)) and (b)(2)(vii) through (b)(2)(xiv) are provided in the
table. Disclosures required by paragraphs (b)(2)(i)(D)(2), (b)(2)(i)(D)(3), (b)(2)(vi) and
(b)(2)(xv) of this section shall be placed directly below the table required by section
1026.6(b)(1). (1026.6(b)(1)(ii))
NOTE: Disclosures required by section 1026.6(b)(3) through (b)(5) that are not otherwise
required to be in the table and other information may be presented with the account
agreement or account-opening disclosure statement, provided such information appears
outside the required table.
6. For creditors that impose fees referred to in section 1026.6(b)(2)(vii) through (b)(2)(xi) that
vary by state and that provide the disclosures required by section 1026.6(b) in person at the
time the open-end (not home-secured) plan is established in connection with financing the
purchase of goods or services determine that the creditor discloses in the account-opening
table either:
a. The specific fee applicable to the consumer’s account, or
b. The range of fees, a statement that the amount of the fee varies by state, and a reference
to the account agreement or other disclosure provided with the account-opening table
where the amount of the fee applicable to the consumer’s account is disclosed.
(1026.6(b)(1)(iii))
NOTE: A creditor is not permitted to list fees for multiple states in the account-opening
summary table (1026.6(b)(1)(iii)).
c. If the amount of any fee required to be disclosed under this section is determined on the
basis of a percentage of another amount, the percentage used and the identification of the
amount against which the percentage is applied may be disclosed instead of the amount
of the fee. (1026.6(b)(1)(iv))
7. The following requirements apply to open-end (not home-secured). Determine that the
creditor discloses in the appropriate format, as applicable:
a. Annual percentage rate. Each periodic rate that may be used to compute the finance
charge on an outstanding balance for purchases, a cash advance, or a balance transfer,
expressed as an APR. When more than one rate applies for a category of transactions,
determine that the creditor discloses the range of balances to which each rate is
applicable. Ensure that the APR for purchases disclosed pursuant to this paragraph is in at
least 16-point type, except for a penalty rate that may apply upon the occurrence of one
or more specific events. (1026.6(b)(2)(i))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 69
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
b. Variable rate information. If the rate is a variable rate, determine that the creditor also
disclosed the fact that the rate may vary and how the rate is determined (i.e., identify the
type of index or formula used in setting the rate). (1026.6(b)(2)(i)(A))
c. Discounted initial rate. If the initial rate is an introductory rate, determine that the
creditor disclosed that the rate would otherwise apply to the account. Where the rate is
not tied to an index or formula, determine that the creditor disclosed the rate that will
apply after the introductory rate expires. For a variable rate account, determine that the
creditor disclosed a rate based on the applicable index or formula in accordance with the
accuracy requirements. (1026.6(b)(2)(i)(B))
d. Premium initial rate. If the initial rate is temporary and is higher than the rate that will
apply after the temporary rate expires, determine that the creditor disclosed the premium
initial rate. Determine that the premium rate for purchases is in at least 16-point type.
(1026.6(b)(2)(i)(C))
e. Penalty rates. Except for introductory rates and employee preferential rates (discussed
below), if the rate is a penalty rate, determine that the creditor disclosed as part of the
APR disclosure the increased rate that may apply, a brief description of the event or
events that may result in the increased rate, and a brief description of how long the
increased rate will remain in effect. (1026.6(b)(2)(i)(D)(1))
f. Introductory rates. If the creditor discloses in the table an introductory rate, as that term
is defined in section 1026.16(g)(2)(ii), determine that the creditor briefly disclosed
directly beneath the table the circumstances under which the introductory rate may be
revoked, and the rate that will apply after the introductory rate is revoked.
(1026.6(b)(2)(i)(D)(2))
g. Employee preferential rates. If the creditor discloses in the table a preferential APR for
which only employees of the creditor, employees of a third party, or other individuals
with similar affiliations with the creditor or third party are eligible, determine that the
creditor briefly disclosed directly beneath the table the circumstances under which the
preferential rate may be revoked, and the rate that will apply after the preferential rate is
revoked. (1026.6(b)(2)(i)(D)(3))
h. Point of sale where APRs vary by state or based on creditworthiness. If the creditor
imposes an APR that varies by state or based on the consumer’s creditworthiness and
provides required disclosures in person at the time the open-end (not home-secured) plan
is established in connection with financing the purchase of goods or services, determine
that the creditor discloses either (1026.6(b)(2)(i)(E)):
i. The specific APR applicable to the consumer’s account, or
ii. The range of the APRs, if the disclosure includes a statement that the APR varies by
state or will be determined based on the consumer’s creditworthiness and refers the
consumer to the account agreement or other disclosure provided with the account-
CFPB April 2015 TILA 70
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
opening table where the AP applicable to the consumer’s account is disclosed.
Determine that the creditor does not list APRs for multiple states in the account
opening table.
i. Credit card accounts under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan.
Determine that the issuer discloses in the table (1026.6(b)(2)(i)(F)):
i. Any introductory rate, and
ii. Any rate that would apply upon expiration of a premium initial rate.
j. Fees for issuance or availability. Determine that the credit disclosed any annual or
periodic fee that may be imposed for the issuance or availability of an open-end plan
(including any fee based on account activity or inactivity); how frequently the fee will be
imposed; and the annualized amount of the fee. (1026.6(b)(2)(ii))
k. Fixed finance charge and minimum interest charge. Determine that the creditor disclosed
any fixed finance charge and any minimum interest charge if it exceeds $1.00 that could
be imposed during a billing cycle, and a brief description of the charge.
(1026.6(b)(2)(iii))
l. Determine that the creditor disclosed any non-periodic fee that relates to opening the
plan. A creditor must disclose that the fee is a one-time fee. (1026.6(b)(2)(ii)(B))
m. Transaction charges. Determine that the creditor discloses any transaction charge
imposed by the creditor for use of the open-end plan for purchases. (1026.6(b)(2)(iv))
n. Grace period. The date by which or the period within which any credit extended may be
repaid without incurring a finance charge due to a periodic interest rate and any
conditions on the availability of the grace period. If no grace period is provided, that fact
must be disclosed. If the length of the grace period varies, the creditor may disclose the
range of days, the minimum number of days, or the average number of the days in the
grace period, if the disclosure is identified as a range, minimum, or average. In disclosing
in the tabular format a grace period that applies to all features on the account, the phrase
“How to Avoid Paying Interest” shall be used as the heading for the row describing the
grace period. If a grace period is not offered on all features of the account, in disclosing
this fact in the tabular format, the phrase “Paying Interest” shall be used as the heading
for the row describing this fact. (1026.6(b)(2)(v))
o. Balance computation method. Determine that the creditor disclosed in the account
opening disclosures the name of the balance computation method that is used to
determine the balance on which the finance charge is computed for each feature, or an
explanation of the method used if it is not listed, along with a statement that an
explanation of the methods required by section 1026.6(b)(4)(i)(D). In determining which
balance computation method to disclose, the creditor should have assumed that the credit
extended will not be repaid within any grace period. (1026.6(b)(2)(vi))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 71
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
p. Cash advance fee. Determine that the creditor disclosed any fee imposed for an extension
of credit in the form of cash or its equivalent. (1026.6(b)(2)(vii))
q. Late payment fee. Determine that the creditor disclosed any fee imposed for a late
payment. (1026.6(b)(2)(viii))
r. Over-the-limit fee. Determine that the creditor disclosed any fee imposed for exceeding
the credit limit. (1026.6(b)(2)(ix))
s. Balance transfer fee. Determine that the creditor disclosed any fee imposed to transfer a
balance. (1026.6(b)(2)(x))
t. Returned payment fee. Determine that the creditor disclosed any fee imposed for a
returned payment. (1026.6(b)(2)(xi))
u. Required insurance, debt cancellation, or debt suspension coverage. Determine that the
fee imposed for required insurance, debt cancellation or suspension coverage is disclosed
if the insurance, debt cancellation or coverage is required as part of the plan. Creditors
must also cross reference additional information about the insurance or coverage as
applicable. (1026.6(b)(2)(xii))
v. Available credit. Determine whether total of required fees for the issuance or availability
of credit and/or security deposit debited to the account at account opening equal or
exceed 15 percent of the credit limit for the account. If so, determine that the creditor
disclosed, as applicable, the available credit remaining after the fees and/or security
deposit are debited to the account. (1026.6(b)(2)(xiii))
w. Website reference. For issuers of credit cards that are not charge cards, determine that the
creditor disclosed a reference to the website established by the CFPB and a statement that
the consumers may obtain on the website information about shopping for and using credit
cards. (1026.6(b)(2)(xiv))
x. Billing error rights reference. Determine that the creditor disclosed a statement that
information about consumers’ right to dispute transactions is included in the account-
opening disclosures. (1026.6(b)(2)(xv))
y. Charges and finance charges. For charges imposed as part of open-end (not home-
secured) plan, the circumstances under which the charge may be imposed, including the
amount of the charge or explanation of how the charge is determined. For finance
charges, a statement of when finance charges begin to accrue, including an explanation of
whether or not any time period exists within which any credit extended may be repaid
without incurring a finance charge. If such a time period is provided, a creditor may, at its
option and without disclosure, impose no finance charge when payment is received after
the time period’s expiration. (1026.6(b)(3)(i))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 72
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
z. Disclosure of rates for open-end (not home-secured) plans. Determine that the creditor
disclosed, as applicable, for each periodic rate that may be used to calculate interest
(1026.6(b)(4)(i)):
i. The rate (expressed as a periodic rate and a corresponding APR),
ii. The range of balances to which the rate is applicable,
iii. The type of transaction to which the periodic rate applies,
iv. An explanation of the method used to determine the balance to which the rate is
applied.
aa. Variable-rate Accounts. For interest rate changes that are tied to increases in an index or
formula (variable-rate accounts) determine that the following are specifically set forth in
the account agreement (1026.6(b)(4)(ii)):
i. The fact that the annual percentage rate may increase.
ii. How the rate is determined, including the margin.
iii. The circumstances under which the rate may increase.
iv. The frequency with which the rate may increase.
v. Any limitation on the amount the rate may change.
vi. The effect(s) of an increase.
vii. Except as specified in paragraph (b)(4)(ii)(H) of this section, a rate is accurate if it is
a rate as of a specified date and this rate was in effect within the last 30 days before
the disclosures are provided.
bb. Rate changes not due to index or formula. For interest rate changes that are specifically
set forth in the account agreement and not tied to increases in an index or formula,
determine that the creditor discloses (1026.6(b)(4)(iii)):
i. The initial rate (expressed as a periodic rate and a corresponding APR)
ii. How long the initial rate will remain in effect and the specific events that cause the
initial rate to change.
iii. The rate (expressed as a periodic rate and a corresponding APR) that will apply when
the initial rate is no longer in effect and any limitation on the time period the new rate
will remain in effect.
iv. The balances to which the new rate will apply.
v. The balances to which the current rate at the time of the change will apply.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 73
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
cc. Voluntary credit insurance, debt cancellation, or debt suspension. Determine that the
creditor disclosed the applicable disclosures if the creditor offers optional credit
insurance, or debt cancellation or debt suspension coverage. (1026.6(b)(5)(i))
dd. Security interests. Determine that the creditor disclosed the fact that the creditor has or
will acquire a security interest in the property purchased under the plan, or in other
property identified by item or type. (1026.6(b)(5)(ii))
ee. Statement of billing rights. Determine that the creditor disclosed a statement that outlines
the consumer’s rights and the creditor’s responsibilities. (1026.6(b)(5)(iii))
Periodic Statement Disclosures – Section 1026.7
1. Rules affecting home-equity plans. For home-equity plans subject to the requirements of
section 1026.40, determine that the creditor disclosed on the periodic statement items 1
through 10 below (1026.7(a)):
NOTE: The requirements of section 1026.7(a) apply only to home-equity plans subject to the
requirements of section 1026.40. Alternatively, a creditor subject to the rules affecting home-
equity plans may, at its option, comply with any of the requirements of section 1026.7(b);
however, any creditor that chooses not to provide a disclosure under section 1026.7(a)(7) must
comply with section 1026.7(b)(6).
a. Previous balance. The account balance outstanding at the beginning of the billing cycle.
(1026.7(a)(1))
b. Identification of transactions. An identification of each credit transaction in accordance
with section 1026.8. (1026.7(a)(2))
c. Credits. Any credit to the account during the billing cycle, including the amount and the
date of crediting. The date need not be provided if a delay in accounting does not result in
any finance or other charge. (1026.7(a)(3))
d. Periodic rates. Each periodic rate that may be used to compute the finance charge, the
range of balances to which it is applicable, and the corresponding annual percentage rate.
If different periodic rates apply to different types of transactions, the types of transactions
to which the periodic rates apply shall also be disclosed. For variable-rate plans, the fact
that the periodic rate(s) may vary. (1026.7(a)(4))
NOTE: If no finance charge is imposed when the outstanding balance is less than a certain
amount, the creditor is not required to disclose that fact, or the balance below which no
finance charge will be imposed
NOTE: Further, an annual percentage rate that differs from the rate that would otherwise
apply and is offered only for a promotional period need not be disclosed except in periods in
which the offered rate is actually applied.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 74
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
e. Balance on which finance charge computed. The amount of the balance to which a
periodic rate was applied and an explanation of how that balance was determined. When
a balance is determined without first deducting all credits and payments made during the
billing cycle, the fact and the amount of the credits and payments shall be disclosed.
(1026.7(a)(5))
f. Amount of finance charge and other charges. (1026.7(a)(6))
i. Finance charges. The amount of any finance charge debited or added to the account
during the billing cycle, using the term finance charge. Determine that the
components of the finance charge are individually itemized and identified to show the
amount(s) due to the application of any periodic rates and the amounts(s) of any other
type of finance charge.
NOTE: If there is more than one periodic rate, the amount of the finance charge
attributable to each rate need not be separately itemized and identified. (1026.7(a)(6)(i))
ii. Other charges. The amounts, itemized and identified by type, of any charges other
than finance charges debited to the account during the billing cycle. (1026.7(a)(6)(ii))
NOTE: Creditors may comply with paragraphs (a)(6) of section 1026.7, or with
paragraph (b)(6) of section 1026.7, at their option.
g. Annual percentage rate. At a creditor’s option, when a finance charge is imposed during
the billing cycle, the annual percentage rate(s) determined under section 1026.14(c) using
the term annual percentage rate. (1026.7(a)(7))
h. Grace period. The date by which or the time period within which the new balance or any
portion of the new balance must be paid to avoid additional finance charges.
(1026.7(a)(8))
i. Address for notice of billing errors. The address to be used for notice of billing errors.
Alternatively, the address may be provided on the billing rights statement permitted by
section 1026.9(a)(2). (1026.7(a)(9))
j. Closing date of billing cycle; new balance. The closing date of the billing cycle and the
account balance outstanding on that date. (1026.7(a)(10))
2. Rules affecting open-end (not home-secured) plans. The requirements of paragraph (b) of this
section (1 through 14 below) apply only to plans other than home-equity plans subject to the
requirements of section 1026.40. For applicable plans, determine that the creditor discloses
on the periodic statement (1026.7(b)):
a. Previous balance. The account balance outstanding at the beginning of the billing cycle.
(1026.7(b)(1))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 75
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
b. Identification of transactions. An identification of each credit transaction in accordance
with section 1026.8. (1026.7(b)(2))
c. Credits. Any credit to the account during the billing cycle, including the amount and the
date of crediting. The date need not be provided if a delay in crediting does not result in
any finance or other charge. (1026.7(b)(3))
d. Periodic rates. Each periodic rate that may be used to compute the interest charge
expressed as an annual percentage rate and using the term Annual Percentage Rate, along
with the range of balances to which it is applicable. (1026.7(b)(4))
NOTE: If no interest charge is imposed when the outstanding balance is less than a certain
amount, the creditor is not required to disclose that fact, or the balance below which no
interest charge will be imposed. The types of transactions to which the periodic rates apply
shall also be disclosed. For variable-rate plans, the fact that the APR may vary; and
A promotional rate, as that term is defined in section 1026.16(g)(2)(i), is required to be
disclosed only in periods in which the offered rate is actually applied.
e. Balance on which finance charge computed. The amount of the balance to which a
periodic rate was applied and an explanation of how that balance was determined, using
the term Balance Subject to Interest Rate. (1026.7(b)(5))
f. Charges imposed. The amounts of any charges imposed as part of a plan as stated in
section 1026.6(b)(3), grouped together, in proximity to transactions identified under
paragraph (b)(2) of this section, substantially similar to Sample G–18(A) in appendix G
to this part. (1026.7(b)(6))
i. Interest. Finance charges attributable to periodic interest rates, using the term Interest
Charge, must be grouped together under the heading Interest Charged, itemized and
totaled by type of transaction, and a total of finance charges attributable to periodic
interest rates, using the term Total Interest, must be disclosed for the statement period
and calendar year to date, using a format substantially similar to Sample G–18(A).
ii. Fees. Charges imposed as part of the plan other than charges attributable to periodic
interest rates must be grouped together under the heading Fees, identified consistent
with the feature or type, and itemized, and a total of charges, using the term Fees,
must be disclosed for the statement period and calendar year to date, using a format
substantially similar to Sample G–18(A).
a. Change-in-terms and increased penalty rate summary for open-end (not home-secured)
plans. Creditors that provide a change-in-terms notice required by section 1026.9(c), or a
rate increase notice required by section 1026.9(g), on or with the periodic statement, must
disclose the information in sections 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A) and (c)(2)(iv)(B) (if applicable)
or section 1026.9(g)(3)(i) on the periodic statement in accordance with the format
CFPB April 2015 TILA 76
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
requirements in section 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(D), and section 1026.9(g)(3)(ii). See Forms G–
18(F) and G–18(G). (1026.7(b)(7))
b. Grace period. The date by which or the time period within which the new balance or any
portion of the new balance must be paid to avoid additional finance charges. If such a
time period is provided, a creditor may, at its option and without disclosure, impose no
finance charge if payment is received after the time period’s expiration. (1026.7(b)(8))
c. Address for notice of billing errors. The address to be used for notice of billing errors.
Alternatively, the address may be provided on the billing rights statement permitted by
section 1026.9(a)(2). (1026.7(b)(9))
d. Closing date of billing cycle; new balance. The closing date of the billing cycle and the
account balance outstanding on that date disclosed in accordance with section
1026.7(b)(13). (1026.7(b)(10))
e. Due date; late payment costs. With the exception of periodic statements provided solely
for charge cards and periodic statements provided for a charged-off account where
payment of the entire account balance is due immediately, determine that the creditor
disclosed (in accordance with section 1026.7(b)(13)) for a credit card account under an
open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan:
i. The due date for a payment (the due date must be the same day of the month for each
billing cycle). (1026.7(b)(11)(i)(A))
ii. The amount of any late payment fee and any increased periodic rate(s) (expressed as
an annual percentage rate(s)) that may be imposed on the account as a result of a late
payment. If a range of late payment fees may be assessed, verify that the card issuer
either states a range of fees or the highest fee and an indication that the fee imposed
could be lower. (1026.7(b)(11)(i)(B))
NOTE: If the rate may be increased for more than one feature or balance, the card issuer
may state the range of rates or the highest rate that could apply and at the issuer’s option
an indication that the rate imposed could be lower.
NOTE: Further, with the exception of the negative or no amortization disclosures
required by section 1026.7(b)(12)(ii), the repayment disclosures in section 1026.7(b)(12)
(as listed in step 12 below) are not required for:
iii. Charge card accounts that require payment of outstanding balances in full at the end
of each billing cycle;
iv. A billing cycle immediately following two consecutive billing cycles in which the
consumer paid the entire balance in full, had a zero outstanding balance or had a
credit balance; and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 77
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
v. A billing cycle where paying the minimum payment due for that billing cycle will pay
the entire outstanding balance on the account for that billing cycle.
f. Given those exceptions above, determine that the card issuer disclosed on the periodic
statement section 1026.7(b)(12):
i. The following statement with a bold heading: “Minimum Payment Warning: If you
make only the minimum payment each period, you will pay more in interest and it
will take you longer to pay off your balance” (1026.7(b)(12)(i)(A));
ii. The minimum payment repayment estimate, as described in appendix M1 to this part.
NOTE: If the minimum payment repayment estimate is less than two years, determine
that the card issuer disclosed the estimate in months. Otherwise, the estimate must be
disclosed in years and rounded to the nearest whole year (1026.7(b)(12)(i)(B));
iii. The minimum payment total cost estimate, as described in appendix M1 to this part,
rounded to the nearest whole dollar or to the nearest cent, at the card issuer’s option
(1026.7(b)(12)(i)(C));
iv. A statement that the minimum payment repayment estimate and the minimum
payment total cost estimate are based on the current outstanding balance shown on
the periodic statement. A statement that the minimum payment repayment estimate
and the minimum payment total cost estimate are based on the assumption that only
minimum payments are made and no other amounts are added to the balance
(1026.7(b)(12)(i)(D));
v. A toll-free telephone number where the consumer may obtain from the card issuer
information about credit counseling services (1026.7(b)(12)(i)(E)); and
vi. The disclosures required for section 1026.7(b)(12)(i)(F)(1):
A. The estimated monthly payment for repayment in 36 months, as described in
appendix M1 to this part. The estimated monthly payment for repayment in 36
months must be rounded to the nearest whole dollar or to the nearest cent, at the
card issuer’s option (1026.7(b)(12)(i)(F)(1)(i));
B. A statement that the card issuer estimates that the consumer will repay the
outstanding balance shown on the periodic statement in three years if the
consumer pays the estimated monthly payment for three years
(1026.7(b)(12)(i)(F)(1)(ii));
C. The total cost estimate for repayment in 36 months, as described in appendix M1
to this part. The total cost estimate for repayment in 36 months must be rounded
to the nearest whole dollar or to the nearest cent, at the card issuer’s option
(1026.7(b)(12)(i)(F)(1)(iii)); and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 78
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
D. The savings estimate for repayment in 36 months, as described in appendix M1 to
this part. The savings estimate for repayment in 36 months must be rounded to the
nearest whole dollar or to the nearest cent, at the card issuer’s option
(1026.7(b)(12)(i)(F)(1)(iv)).
NOTE: The disclosures (A through D above) required for section 1026.7(b)(12)(i)(F)(1)
do not apply to a periodic statement in any of the following circumstances:
1) The minimum payment repayment estimate that is disclosed on the periodic
statement pursuant to paragraph (b)(12)(i)(B) of this section after rounding is
three years or less;
2) The estimated monthly payment for repayment in 36 months, as described in
appendix M1 to this part, rounded to the nearest whole dollar or nearest cent
that is calculated for a particular billing cycle is less than the minimum
payment required for the plan for that billing cycle; and
3) A billing cycle where an account has both a balance in a revolving feature
where the required minimum payments for this feature will not amortize that
balance in a fixed amount of time specified in the account agreement and a
balance in a fixed repayment feature where the required minimum payment
for this fixed repayment feature will amortize that balance in a fixed amount
of time specified in the account agreement which is less than 36 months.
vii. If negative or no amortization occurs when calculating the minimum payment
estimate as described in appendix M1, determine that the card issuer provides the
following disclosures on each periodic statement instead of the disclosures set forth in
section 1026.7(b)(12)(i) (1026.7(b)(12)(ii)):
A. “Minimum Payment Warning: Even if you make no more charges using this
card, if you make only the minimum payment each month we estimate you will
never pay off the balance shown on this statement because your payment will
be less than the interest charged each month” (1026.7(b)(12)(ii)(A));
B. “If you make more than the minimum payment each period, you will pay less in
interest and pay off your balance sooner” (1026.7(b)(12)(ii)(B));
C. The estimated monthly payment for repayment in 36 months rounded to the
nearest whole dollar or to the nearest cent, at the creditor’s option
(1026.7(b)(12)(ii)(C));
D. A statement that the card issuer estimates that the consumer will repay the
outstanding balance shown on the periodic statement in three years if the
consumer pays the estimated monthly payment each month for three years
(1026.7(b)(12)(ii)(D)); and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 79
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
E. A toll-free telephone number where the consumer may obtain from the card issuer
information about credit counseling services consistent with section
1026.7(b)(12)(iv). (1026.7(b)(12)(ii)(E))
viii. Verify that the items required to be disclosed, as addressed in the procedures in step
12 above (required by section 1026.7(b)(12)) are disclosed in accordance with the
format requirements of section 1026.7(b)(13) and are substantially similar to the
samples provided in appendix G of Regulation Z.
ix. Determine that a card issuer provides (to the extent available from the United States
Trustee or a bankruptcy administrator) through the disclosed toll-free telephone
number the name, street address, telephone number, and website address for at least
three organizations that have been approved by the United States Trustee or a
bankruptcy administrator to provide credit counseling services in either the state in
which the billing address for the account is located or the state specified by the
consumer. (1026.7(b)(12)(iv)(A))
x. Determine that the card issuer at least annually updates the credit counseling
information it discloses for consistency with the information available from the
United States Trustee or a bankruptcy administrator. (1026.7(b)(12)(iv)(B))
g. Determine that the card issuer provided periodic statement disclosures according to the
following format requirements (1026.7(b)(13)):
i. The due date is disclosed on the front of the first page of the periodic statement and
that the amount of the late payment fee and the APR(s) are stated in close proximity
thereto.
ii. The ending balance and the repayment disclosures (required by paragraph (b)(12) of
section 1026.7 are disclosed closely proximate to the minimum payment due.
iii. The due date, late payment fee and APR, ending balance, minimum payment due, and
repayment disclosures are grouped together.
NOTE: Sample G-18(D) in appendix G of Regulation Z sets forth an example of how
these terms may be grouped.
h. For accounts with an outstanding balance subject to a deferred interest or similar
program, determine that the creditor disclosed the date by which that outstanding balance
must be paid in full in order to avoid the obligation to pay finance charges on such
balance on the front of any page of each periodic statement issued during the deferred
interest period beginning with the first periodic statement issued during the deferred
interest period that reflects the deferred interest or similar transaction. The disclosure
provided pursuant to this paragraph must be substantially similar to Sample G–18(H) in
appendix G to this part. (1026.7(b)(14))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 80
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Subsequent Disclosure Requirements – Section 1026.9
1. Determine whether the creditor mailed or delivered the billing rights statement at least once
per calendar year, at intervals of not less than 6 months or more than 18 months, customers
and whether the institution used the short form notice with each periodic statement.
(1026.9(a)(1))
NOTE: As an alternative to the annual billing rights statement (1026.9(a)(1)), the creditor
may mail or deliver, on or with each periodic statement, a statement substantially similar to
Model Form G–4 or Model Form G–4(A) in appendix G to this part, as applicable. Creditors
offering home-equity plans subject to the requirements of section 1026.40 may use either
Model Form, at their option. (1026.9(a)(2))
2. If, 30 days after mailing or delivering the account-opening disclosures under sections
1026.6(a)(1) or (b)(3)(ii)(A), the creditor adds a credit feature or furnishes a credit access
device (other than as a renewal, resupply, or the original issuance of a credit card, or except
with regard to checks that access a credit card account) on the same finance charge terms,
determine that the creditor discloses, before the consumer uses the feature or device for the
first time, that it is for use in obtaining credit under the terms previously disclosed.
(1026.9(b)(1))
3. Determine that, except with regard to checks that access a credit card account, whenever a
credit feature is added or a credit access device is mailed or delivered to the consumer, and
the finance charge terms for the feature or device differ from disclosures previously given,
the disclosures required by sections 1026.6(a)(1) or (b)(3)(ii)(A) that are applicable to the
added feature or device are given before the consumer uses the feature or device for the first
time. (1026.9(b)(2))
4. Checks that access a credit card account. For open-end plans not subject to the requirements
of section 1026.40, if checks that can be used to access a credit card account are provided
more than 30 days after account-opening disclosures under section 1026.6(b) are mailed or
delivered, or are provided within 30 days of the account-opening disclosures and the finance
charge terms for the checks differ from the finance charge terms previously disclosed,
determine that the creditor discloses on the front of the page containing the checks the
following terms in the form of a table with the headings, content, and form substantially
similar to Sample G–19 in appendix G to this part (1026.9(b)(3)):
a. If a promotional rate applies to the checks, determine that the creditor discloses:
i. The promotional rate and the time period during which the promotional rate will
remain in effect (1026.9(b)(3)(i)(A)(1));
ii. The type of rate that will apply (such as whether the purchase or cash advance rate
applies) after the promotional rate expires, and the annual percentage rate that will
apply after the promotional rate expires. For a variable-rate account, a creditor must
disclose an annual percentage rate based on the applicable index or formula in
CFPB April 2015 TILA 81
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
accordance with the accuracy requirements set forth in paragraph (b)(3)(ii) of this
section (1026.9(b)(3)(i)(A)(2)); and
iii. The date, if any, by which the consumer must use the checks in order to qualify for
the promotional rate. If the creditor will honor checks used after such date but will
apply an annual percentage rate other than the promotional rate, the creditor must
disclose this fact and the type of annual percentage rate that will apply if the
consumer uses the checks after such date (1026.9(b)(3)(i)(A)(3)).
b. If any APR required to be disclosed pursuant to section 1026.9(b)(3)(i) is a variable rate,
determine that the creditor also disclosed the fact that the rate may vary and how the rate
is determined. Determine that the creditor identified the type of index or formula used in
setting the rate. Determine that the creditor does not disclose the value of the index and
the amount of the margin that are used to calculate the variable rate in the table and that
any applicable limitations on rate increases are not included in the table
(1026.9(b)(3)(iii)).
c. If no promotional rate applies to the checks, determine that the creditor discloses:
i. The type of rate that will apply to the checks and the applicable annual percentage
rate. For a variable-rate account, a creditor must disclose an annual percentage rate
based on the applicable index or formula in accordance with the accuracy
requirements set forth in section 1026.9(b)(3)(ii). (1026.9(b)(3)(i)(B)(1))
d. Determine that the creditor discloses:
i. Any transaction fees applicable to the checks disclosed under section
1026.6(b)(2)(iv). (1026.9(b)(3)(i)(C))
ii. Whether or not a grace period is given within which any credit extended by use of the
checks may be repaid without incurring a finance charge due to a periodic interest
rate. When disclosing whether there is a grace period, the phrase “How to Avoid
Paying Interest on Check Transactions” shall be used as the row heading when a
grace period applies to credit extended by the use of the checks. When disclosing the
fact that no grace period exists for credit extended by use of the checks, the phrase
“Paying Interest” shall be used as the row heading. (1026.9(b)(3)(i)(D))
NOTE: The disclosures in section 1026.9(b)(3)(i) must be accurate as of the time the
disclosures are mailed or delivered. A variable APR is accurate if it was in effect within
60 days of when the disclosures are mailed or delivered. (1026.9(b)(3)(ii))
5. Determine, for home-equity plans subject to the requirements of section 1026.40:
a. Whenever any term required to be disclosed under section 1026.6(a) is changed or the
required minimum periodic payment is increased, the creditor mailed or delivered written
notice of the change at least 15 days prior to the effective date of the change. If the
CFPB April 2015 TILA 82
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
consumer agreed to the change, determine that notice was provided before the change
went into effect. (1026.9(c)(1)(i))
b. If the creditor prohibits additional extensions of credit or reduces the credit limit that the
creditor mailed or delivered notice of the action not later than three business days after
such action is taken. The notice must contain the specific reasons for the action.
(1026.9(c)(1)(iii))
NOTE: Notice is not required when the change involves a reduction of any component of a
finance charge or other charge or when the change results from an agreement involving a
court proceeding. (1026.9(c)(1)(ii))
6. For plans other than home-equity plans subject to the requirements of section 1026.40,
except as provided in sections 1026.9(c)(2)(i)(B), (c)(2)(iii) and (c)(2)(v), when a significant
change in account terms as described in section 1026.9(c)(2)(ii) is made, determine that the
creditor provides a written notice of the change at least 45 days prior to the effective date of
the change to each consumer who may be affected. (1026.9(c)(2)(i)(A))
7. The 45-day timing requirement, however, does not apply if the consumer has agreed to a
particular change as described in section 1026.9(c)(2)(i)(B). For these instances, however,
determine that the creditor provided a notice in accordance with the timing requirements of
section 1026.9(c)(2)(i)(B). (1026.9(c)(2)(i)(A))
8. For open-end (not home-secured) plans, determine that increases in the rate applicable to a
consumer’s account due to delinquency, default or as a penalty described in section
1026.9(g) that are not due to a change in the contractual terms of the consumer’s account are
disclosed pursuant to section 1026.9(g) instead of section 1026.9(c)(2). (1026.9(c)(2)(i)(A))
9. When a notice of change in terms is required, determine that it is mailed or delivered no later
than the effective date of the change, if the consumer agrees to the particular change. section
1026.9(c)(2)(i)(B) applies only when a consumer substitutes collateral or when the creditor
can advance additional credit only if a change relatively unique to that consumer is made,
such as the consumer’s providing additional security or paying an increased minimum
payment amount. (1026.9(c)(2)(i)(B))
NOTE: The 45-day timing requirements discussed in step f above does not apply in certain
narrow circumstances, as described in section 1026.9(c)(2)(i)(B). The following are not
considered agreements between the consumer and the creditor for purposes of section
1026.9(c)(2)(i)(B):
a. The consumer’s general acceptance of the creditor’s contract reservation of the right to
change terms;
b. The consumer’s use of the account (which might imply acceptance of its terms under
state law);
CFPB April 2015 TILA 83
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
c. The consumer’s acceptance of a unilateral term change that is not particular to that
consumer, but rather is of general applicability to consumers with that type of account;
and,
d. The consumer’s request to reopen a closed account or to upgrade an existing account to
another account offered by the creditor with different credit or other features.
(1026.9(c)(2)(i)(B))
10. The 45-day advance notice requirement applies to changes to the following terms
(1026.9(c)(2)(ii)):
a. APR increase, including each periodic rate that may be used to compute the finance
charge on outstanding balances for purchases, a cash advance, or a balance transfer (such
rates may include any discounted initial rate, premium initial rate, or penalty rate that
may be applied to the account);
i. Variable-rate information;
ii. Discounted or premium initial rates;
iii. Penalty rates;
b. Fees for issuance or availability, including any fee based upon account activity or
inactivity;
c. Fixed finance charge or minimum interest charge, if it exceeds $1.00;
d. Transaction charge for purchases;
e. Grace period;
f. Balance computation method;
g. Cash advance fee;
h. Late payment fee;
i. Over-the-limit fee;
j. Balance transfer fee;
k. Returned payment fee;
l. Required insurance, debt cancellation, or debt suspension coverage; and
m. Increase in required minimum periodic payment, or the acquisition of a security interest.
11. Except as provided in section 1026.9(c)(2)(vi), if a creditor increases any component of a
charge, or introduces a new charge, required to be disclosed under section 1026.6(b)(3) that
CFPB April 2015 TILA 84
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
is not a significant change in account terms as described in paragraph (c)(2)(ii) of this
section, determine that the creditor either (1026.9(c)(2)(iii)):
a. Complies with the requirements of section 1026.9(c)(2)(i), or
b. Provides notice of the amount of the charge before the consumer agrees to or becomes
obligated to pay the charge, at a time and in a manner that a consumer would be likely to
notice the disclosure of the charge, either in writing or orally.
12. Ensure that the written change-in-terms notice contains the following disclosures
(1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)):
a. A summary of the changes made to terms required by sections 1026.6(b)(1) and (b)(2) or
section 1026.6(b)(4), a description of any increase in the required minimum payment, and
a description of any security interests being acquired by the creditor.
b. A statement that changes are being made to the account.
c. For accounts other than credit card accounts under an open-end (not home-secured)
consumer credit plan subject to section 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(B), a statement indicating that
the consumer has the right to opt out of the changes, if applicable, and a reference to the
opt-out right provided in the notice, if applicable.
d. The date the changes will become effective.
e. If applicable, a statement that the consumer may find additional information about the
summarized changes, and other changes, in the notice.
f. In the case of a rate change, other than a penalty rate, a statement that if a penalty rate
currently applies to the consumer’s account, the new rate described in the notice will not
apply to the consumer’s account until the consumer’s account balances are no longer
subject to the penalty rate.
g. If the change in terms being disclosed is an increase in the APR, the balances to which the
increased rate will apply. If applicable, creditors should disclose a statement identifying the
balances to which the current rate will apply as of the effective date of the change.
h. If the change in terms being disclosed is an increase in an annual percentage rate for a
credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan, a
statement of no more than four principal reasons for the rate increase, listed in their order
of importance.
NOTE: The disclosed reasons must accurately describe the principal factors actually
considered by the card issuer in increasing the rate. (Comment 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)-11)
13. In addition to the disclosures in section 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A), if a card issuer makes a
significant change in account terms on a credit card account under an open-end (not home-
CFPB April 2015 TILA 85
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
secured) consumer credit plan, determine that the creditor provides the following information
on the notice provided pursuant to section 1026.9(c)(2)(i) (1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(B)):
NOTE: This information is not required to be provided in the case of an increase in the
required minimum periodic payment, an increase in a fee as a result of a reevaluation of a
determination made under section 1026.52(b)(1)(i) or an adjustment to the safe harbors in
section 1026.52(b)(1)(ii) to reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index, a change in an
annual percentage rate applicable to a consumer’s account, an increase in a fee previously
reduced consistent with 50 U.S.C. app. 527 (Servicemembers Civil Relief Act) or similar
federal or state statute or regulation if the amount of the increased fee does not exceed the
amount of that fee prior to the reduction, or when the change results from the creditor not
receiving the consumer’s required minimum periodic payment within 60 days after the due
date for that payment.
a. A statement that the consumer has the right to reject the change or changes prior to the
effective date of the changes, unless the consumer fails to make a required minimum
periodic payment within 60 days after the due date for that payment;
b. Instructions for rejecting the change or changes, and a toll-free telephone number that the
consumer may use to notify the creditor of the rejection; and
c. If applicable, a statement that if the consumer rejects the change or changes, the
consumer’s ability to use the account for further advances will be terminated or
suspended.
14. Changes resulting from failure to make minimum periodic payment within 60 days from due
date for credit card accounts under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan.
For a credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan
(1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(C)):
a. If the significant change required to be disclosed pursuant to section 1026.9(c)(2)(i) of
this section is an increase in an annual percentage rate or a fee or charge required to be
disclosed under sections 1026.6(b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iii), or (b)(2)(xii) based on the
consumer’s failure to make a minimum periodic payment within 60 days from the due
date for that payment, determine that the notice provided pursuant to paragraph (c)(2)(i)
of this section states that the increase will cease to apply to transactions that occurred
prior to or within 14 days of provision of the notice, if the creditor receives six
consecutive required minimum periodic payments on or before the payment due date,
beginning with the first payment due following the effective date of the increase.
b. If the significant change required to be disclosed pursuant to section 1026.9(c)(2)(i) is an
increase in a fee or charge required to be disclosed under sections 1026.6(b)(2)(ii),
(b)(2)(iii), or (b)(2)(xii) based on the consumer’s failure to make a minimum periodic
payment within 60 days from the due date for that payment, determine that the notice
provided pursuant to section 1026.9(c)(2)(i) also states the reason for the increase.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 86
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
15. Determine that the summary of changes described in section 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)(1) is in a
tabular format (except for a summary of any increase in the required minimum periodic
payment, a summary of a term required to be disclosed under section 1026.6(b)(4) that is not
required to be disclosed under section 1026.6(b)(1) and (b)(2), or a description of any
security interest being acquired by the creditor), with headings and format substantially
similar to any of the account-opening tables found in G–17 in appendix G. Determine that the
table discloses the changed term and information relevant to the change, if that relevant
information is required by section 1026.6(b)(1) and (b)(2). Determine that the new terms are
described in the same level of detail as required when disclosing the terms under section
1026.6(b)(2). (1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(D)(1))
16. If a notice required by section 1026.9(c)(2)(i) (change in terms) is included on or with a
periodic statement, determine that the information described in section
1026.6(c)(2)(iv)(A)(1) is disclosed on the front of any page of the statement. Determine that
the summary of changes described in section 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)(1) immediately follows the
information described in section 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)(2) through section
1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)(7) and, if applicable, sections 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)(8),
1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(B), and 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(C), and is substantially similar to the format shown
in Sample G-20 or G-21 in appendix G to this part. (1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(D)(2))
17. If a notice required by section 1026.9(c)(2)(i) is not included on or with a periodic statement,
determine that the information described in section 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)(1) is disclosed on the
front of the first page of the notice or segregated on a separate page from other information
given with the notice. (1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(D)(3))
NOTE: The summary of changes required to be in a table pursuant to paragraph
(c)(2)(iv)(A)(1) of this section may be on more than one page, and may use both the front
and reverse sides, so long as the table begins on the front of the first page of the notice and
there is a reference on the first page indicating that the table continues on the following page.
18. Determine that the summary of changes described in section 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)(1)
immediately follows the information described in section 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)(2) through
section 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)(7) and, if applicable, sections 1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(A)(8),
(c)(2)(iv)(B), and (c)(2)(iv)(C), of this section, and is substantially similar to the format
shown in Sample G-20 or G-21 in appendix G to this part. (1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(D)(3))
19. For open-end plans (other than home equity plans subject to the requirements of section
1026.40), note that a creditor is not required to provide notice under this section if
(1026.9(c)(2)(v)):
a. The change involves:
i. Charges for documentary evidence;
ii. A reduction of any component of a finance or other charge;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 87
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
iii. A suspension of future credit privileges (except as provided in section
1026.9(c)(2)(vi) of this section) or termination of an account or plan;
iv. When the change results from an agreement involving a court proceeding;
v. When the change is an extension of the grace period; or
vi. The change is applicable only to checks that access a credit card account and the
changed terms are disclosed on or with the checks in accordance with section
1026.9(b)(3) (1026.9(c)(2)(v)(A));
b. The change is an increase in an APR upon the expiration of a specified period of time,
provided that (1026.9(c)(2)(v)(B)):
i. Prior to commencement of that period, the creditor disclosed in writing to the
consumer, in a clear and conspicuous manner, the length of the period and the APR or
fee that would apply after expiration of the period;
ii. The disclosure of the length of the period and the APR or fee that would apply after
expiration of the period are set forth in close proximity and in equal prominence to
the first listing of the disclosure of the rate or fee that applies during the specified
period of time; and
iii. The APR or fee that applies after that period does not exceed the rate disclosed
pursuant to section 1026.9(c)(2)(v)(B)(1) or, if the rate disclosed pursuant to section
1026.9(c)(2)(v)(B)(1) was a variable rate, the rate following any such increase is a
variable rate determined by the same formula (index and margin) that was used to
calculate the variable rate disclosed pursuant to section 1026.9(c)(2)(v)(B)(1);
c. The change is an increase in a variable APR in accordance with a credit card or other
account agreement that provides for changes in the rate according to operation of an
index that is not under the control of the creditor and is available to the general public
(1026.9(c)(2)(v)(C)); or
d. The change is an increase in an APR, a fee or charge required to be disclosed under
sections 1026.6(b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iii), (b)(2)(viii), (b)(2)(ix) or (b)(2)(xii), or the required
minimum periodic payment due to the completion of a workout or temporary hardship
arrangement by the consumer or the consumer’s failure to comply with the terms of such
an arrangement, provided that (1026.9(c)(2)(v)(D)):
i. The APR or fee or charge applicable to a category of transactions or the required
minimum periodic payment following any such increase does not exceed the rate or
fee or charge or required minimum periodic payment that applied to that category of
transactions prior to commencement of the arrangement or, if the rate that applied to a
category of transactions prior to the commencement of the workout or temporary
hardship arrangement was a variable rate, the rate following any such increase is a
CFPB April 2015 TILA 88
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
variable rate determined by the same formula (index and margin) that applied to the
category of transactions prior to commencement of the workout or temporary
hardship arrangement; and
ii. The creditor has provided the consumer, prior to the commencement of such
arrangement, with a clear and conspicuous disclosure of the terms of the arrangement
(including any increases due to such completion or failure). This disclosure must
generally be provided in writing. However, a creditor may provide the disclosure of
the terms of the arrangement orally by telephone, provided that the creditor mails or
delivers a written disclosure of the terms of the arrangement to the consumer as soon
as reasonably practicable after the oral disclosure is provided.
20. For open-end plans that are not subject to the requirements of section 1026.40, if a creditor
decreases the credit limit on the account, determine that advance notice of the decrease is
provided before an over-the-limit fee or a penalty rate can be imposed solely as a result of the
consumer exceeding the newly decreased credit limit. Determine that notice is provided in
writing or orally at least 45 days prior to imposing the over-the-limit fee or penalty rate and
that it states that the credit limit on the account has been or will be decreased.
(1026.9(c)(2)(vi))
21. Determine that the disclosures contained in section 1026.60(b)(1) through (b)(7) are provided
if the account is renewed and (1) the card issuer imposes an annual or other periodic fee for
the renewal or (2) the card issuer has changed or amended any term of the account required
to be disclosed under section 1026.6(b)(1) and (b)(2) that has not previously been disclosed
to the consumer. Additionally, the disclosure provided upon renewal must disclose how and
when the cardholder may terminate the credit to avoid paying the renewal fee, if any.
(1026.9(e))
22. For plans other than home-equity plans subject to the requirements of section 1026.40
(except as provided in section 1026.9(g)(4)), determine that the creditor provides a written
notice to each consumer who may be affected when (1026.9(g)(1)):
a. A rate is increased due to the consumer’s delinquency or default; or
b. A rate is increased as a penalty for one or more events specified in the account
agreement, such as making a late payment or obtaining an extension of credit that
exceeds the credit limit.
23. Whenever any notice is required to be given pursuant to paragraph (g)(1) of this section,
determine that the creditor provided written notice of the increase in rates at least 45 days
prior to the effective date of the increase. The notice must be provided after the occurrence of
the events described in section 1026.9(g)(1)(i) and (g)(1)(ii) that trigger the imposition of the
rate increase. (1026.9(g)(2))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 89
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
24. If a creditor is increasing the rate due to delinquency or default or as a penalty, determine that
the creditor provided the following information on the notice sent pursuant to section
1026.9(g)(1) (1026.9(g)(3)(i)(A)):
a. A statement that the delinquency or default rate or penalty rate, as applicable, has been
triggered;
b. The date on which the delinquency or default rate or penalty rate will apply;
c. The circumstances under which the delinquency or default rate or penalty rate, as
applicable, will cease to apply to the consumer’s account, or that the delinquency or
default rate or penalty rate will remain in effect for a potentially indefinite time period;
d. A statement indicating to which balances the delinquency or default rate or penalty rate
will be applied;
e. If applicable, a description of any balances to which the current rate will continue to
apply as of the effective date of the rate increase, unless a consumer fails to make a
minimum periodic payment within 60 days from the due date for that payment; and
f. For a credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan, a
statement of no more than four principal reasons for the rate increase, listed in their order
of importance.
NOTE: The disclosed reasons must accurately describe the principal factors actually
considered by the card issuer in increasing the rate. (Comment 1026.9(g) - 7)
25. For a credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan, if the
rate increase required to be disclosed pursuant to paragraph (g)(1) of this section is an
increase pursuant to section 1026.55(b)(4) based on the consumer’s failure to make a
minimum periodic payment within 60 days from the due date for that payment, determine
that the notice provided pursuant to paragraph (g)(1) of this section also states that the
increase will cease to apply to transactions that occurred prior to or within 14 days of
provision of the notice, if the creditor receives six consecutive required minimum periodic
payments on or before the payment due date, beginning with the first payment due following
the effective date of the increase. (1026.9(g)(3)(i)(B))
26. If a notice required by section 1026.9(g)(1) (Increase in rates due to delinquency or default
or as a penalty) is included on or with a periodic statement, determine that the disclosure
described in paragraph (g)(3)(i) is in the form of a table and provided on the front of any
page of the periodic statement, above the notice described in paragraph (c)(2)(iv) of this
section if that notice is provided on the same statement. (1026.9(g)(3)(ii)(A))
27. If a notice required by section 1026.9(g)(1) (increase in rates) is not included on or with a
periodic statement, determine that the information described in section 1026.9(g)(3)(i) is
CFPB April 2015 TILA 90
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
disclosed on the front of the first page of the notice. Ensure that only information related to
the increase in the rate to a penalty rate is included with the notice.
NOTE: This notice may be combined with a notice described in sections 1026.9(c)(2)(iv) or
(g)(4) (A statement indicating to which balances the delinquency or default rate or penalty
rate will be applied) of this section. (1026.9(g)(3)(ii)(B))
28. Exception for Decreases in the Credit Limit. If a creditor does not provide the 45-day notice
under section 1026.9(g)(1) prior to increasing the rate for obtaining an extension of credit
that exceeds the credit limit, determine that the creditor provides at least 45 days in advance
of imposing the penalty rate a notice, in writing, that includes (1026.9(g)(4)):
a. A statement that the credit limit on the account has or will be decreased.
b. The date on which the penalty rate will apply, if the outstanding balance exceeds the
credit limit as of that date;
c. A statement that the penalty rate will not be imposed on that date, if the outstanding
balance does not exceed the credit limit as of that date;
d. The circumstances under which the penalty rate, if applied, will cease to apply to the
account, or that the penalty rate, if applied, will remain in effect for a potentially
indefinite period of time;
e. A statement indicating to which balances the penalty rate may be applied; and
f. If applicable, a description of any balances to which the current rate will continue to
apply as of the effective date of the rate increase, unless the consumer fails to make a
minimum periodic payment within 60 days from the due date for that payment.
In addition to this notice, determine that the creditor does not increase the applicable rate
to the penalty rate if the outstanding balance does not exceed the credit limit on the date
set forth in the notice. (1026.9(g)(4)(ii))
29. If a notice provided pursuant to section 1026.9(g)(4)(i) is included on or with a periodic
statement, determine that the information described in section 1026.9(g)(4)(i) is in the form
of a table and provided on the front of any page of the periodic statement
(1026.9(g)(4)(iii)(A)); or,
30. If a notice required by section 1026.9(g)(4)(i) is not included on or with a periodic statement,
determine that the information described in section 1026.9(g)(4)(i) is disclosed on the front
of the first page of the notice. Determine that only information related to the reduction in
credit limit is included with the notice, except that this notice may be combined with a notice
described in sections 1026.9(c)(2)(iv) or (g)(1). (1026.9(g)(4)(iii)(B))
31. When the consumer is given the right to reject a significant change to an account term prior
to the effective date of the change, determine whether the consumer was given the option to
CFPB April 2015 TILA 91
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
reject the change by notifying the creditor of the rejection before the effective date of the
change. (1026.9(h)(1))
32. If the creditor was notified of the rejection of a significant change to an account term,
determine that the creditor did not:
a. Apply the charge to the account;
b. Impose a fee or charge or treat the account as in default solely as a result of the rejection;
or
c. Require repayment of the balance on the account using a method that is LESS beneficial
to the consumer than one of the following methods:
i. The method of repayment for the account on the date on which the creditor was
notified of the rejection;
ii. An amortization period of not less than five years, beginning no earlier than the date
on which the creditor was notified of the rejection; or
iii. A required minimum periodic payment that includes a percentage of the balance that
is equal to no more than twice the percentage required on the date on which the
creditor was notified of the rejection. (1026.9(h)(2))
NOTE: These requirements do not apply if the creditor has not received the consumer’s
required minimum periodic payment within 60 days after the due date for that payment
and the creditor has provided timely change in terms disclosures. (1026.9(h)(3))
33. Determine that a statement of the maximum interest rate that may be imposed during the
term of the obligation is made for any dwelling-secured loan in which the APR may increase
during the plan. (1026.30(b))
34. For any open-end mortgage loan (credit transaction that is secured by the principal dwelling
of a consumer) that was sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred to the covered person,
determine that the covered person notifies the borrower in writing of such transfer, including
(1026.39):
a. An identification of the loan that was sold, assigned, or otherwise transferred;
b. The name, address, and telephone number of the covered person who owns the mortgage
loan;
c. The date of transfer (either the date of acquisition recognized in the books and records of
the covered person or that of the transferring party) identified by the covered person;
d. The name, address, and telephone number of an agent or party having authority, on
behalf of the covered person, to receive notice of the right to rescind and resolve issues
concerning the consumer’s payments on the mortgage loan;
CFPB April 2015 TILA 92
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
e. Where transfer of ownership of the debt to the covered person is or may be recorded in
public records or, alternatively, that the transfer of ownership has not been recorded in
public records at the time the disclosure is provided; and
f. At the option of the covered person, any other relevant information regarding the
transaction.
g. If there are multiple covered persons, contact information for each of them, unless one of
them has been authorized to receive the consumer’s notice of the right to rescind and
resolve issues concerning the consumer’s payments on the loan. (1026.39(d)-(e))
NOTE: This notice of sale or transfer must be provided for any consumer credit transaction
that is secured by the principal dwelling of a consumer. This notification is required by the
covered person even if the loan servicer remains the same. In addition, if more than one
consumer is liable on the obligation, the covered person may mail or deliver the disclosure
notice to any consumer who is primarily liable. And, if an acquisition involves multiple
covered persons who each acquire a partial interest in the loan pursuant to separate and
unrelated agreements, each covered person has a duty to ensure that disclosures related to its
acquisition are accurate and provided in a timely manner unless an exception in section
1026.39(c) applies. The parties may, but are not required to, provide a single notice that
satisfies the timing and content requirements applicable to each covered person. (Comment
1026.39(b)(5) – 2)
Disclosure Requirements for Over-the-Limit Transactions –
Section 1026.56
1. Determine that the oral, written or electronic “opt-in” notice includes all of the following
applicable items (and not any information not specified in or otherwise permitted)
(1026.56(e)(1)):
a. Fees. The dollar amount of any fees or charges assessed by the card issuer on a
consumer’s account for an over-the-limit transaction;
b. APR(s). Any increased periodic rate(s) (expressed as an APR(s)) that may be imposed on
the account as a result of an over-the-limit transaction; and
c. Disclosure of opt-in right. An explanation of the consumer’s right to affirmatively
consent to the card issuer’s payment of over-the-limit transactions, including the
method(s) by which the consumer may consent.
2. Determine that the written notice informing the consumer of the right to revoke consent
following the assessment of an over-the-limit fee or charge describes that right, including the
method(s) by which the consumer may revoke consent. (1026.56(e)(2))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 93
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Reverse Mortgage Forms Review Procedures
(Both Open- and Closed-End)
1. Determine that the disclosures required for reverse mortgage transactions are substantially
similar to the model form in appendix K and include the items below (1026.33):
a. A statement that the consumer is not obligated to complete the reverse mortgage
transaction merely because he or she has received the disclosures or signed an
application.
b. A good faith projection of the total cost of the credit expressed as a table of “total annual
loan cost rates” including payments to the consumer, additional creditor compensation,
limitations on consumer liability, assumed annual appreciation, and the assumed loan
period.
c. An itemization of loan terms, charges, the age of the youngest borrower, and the
appraised property value.
d. An explanation of the table of total annual loan costs rates.
NOTE: Forms that include or involve current transactions, such as change in terms notices,
periodic billing statements, rescission notices, and billing error communications, are verified
for accuracy when the file review worksheets are completed.
Timing Requirements
1. Timing Requirements – Open-End Credit. Review financial institution policies,
procedures, and systems to determine, either separately or when completing the actual file
review, whether the applicable disclosures listed below are furnished when required by
Regulation Z. Take into account products that have different features, such as closed-end
loans or credit card accounts that are fixed or variable rate.
a. Credit card application and solicitation disclosures. On or with the application
(1026.60(b))
b. HELOC disclosures. At the time the application is provided or within three business days
under certain circumstances. (1026.40(b))
c. Open-end credit initial disclosures. Before the first transaction is made under the plan.
(1026.5(b)(1))
d. Card Holder Agreement. Verify that the card issuer sends to the cardholder or otherwise
make available to the cardholder a copy of the cardholder’s agreement in electronic or
paper form no later than 30 days after the issuer receives the cardholder’s request
(1026.58(e)(1)(ii)). Determine that the issuer has adequate procedures for ensuring that
this requirement is met.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 94
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
e. Periodic statement disclosures for open-end credit under section 1026.7. Required if at
the end of a billing cycle, the account has a debit or credit balance of $1 or more or if a
finance charge has been imposed (1026.5(b)(2)(i)). Also, the creditor must adopt
reasonable procedures designed to ensure that periodic statements for credit card
accounts are mailed or delivered at least 21 days prior to the payment due date and the
date on which any grace period expires (for non-credit card open-end credit, there is a 21
day rule if there is a grace period and a 14-day rule if there is no grace period).
(1026.5(b)(2)(ii)(B)(2))
f. Statement of billing rights. At least once per year. (1026.9(a))
g. Supplemental credit devices. Before the first transaction under the plan. (1026.9(b))
h. Open-end credit change in significant terms as a result of a change in contractual terms.
45 days prior to the effective change date. (1026.9(c)(2))
i. Open-end change in terms or rates due to delinquency or default or as a penalty. 45 days
prior to the effective change date. (1026.9(g))
j. Finance charge imposed at time of transaction. Prior to imposing any fee. (1026.9(d))
k. Disclosures upon renewal of credit or charge card. 30 days or one billing cycle,
whichever is less before the delivery of the periodic statement on which the renewal fee
is charged, or at least 30 days prior to the scheduled renewal date if the creditor has
changed or amended any term required to be disclosed under section 1026.6(b)(1) and
(b)(2) that has not previously been disclosed to the consumer. (1026.9(e))
l. Change in credit account insurance provider. – Certain information 30 days before the
change in provider occurs and certain information 30 days after the change in provider
occurs. The institution may provide a combined disclosure 30 days before the change in
provider occurs. (1026.9(f))
2. Timing Requirements – Closed-End Credit Secured by a Dwelling
a. Closed-end credit disclosures for transactions not subject to 1026.19(e) and (f) must be
made before consummation. (1026.17(b))
b. Disclosures for reverse mortgages. Several disclosure timing requirements apply to
reverse mortgages subject to 1026.33 and RESPA:
i. Determine whether the creditor provides early TIL disclosures within three business
days after receiving the consumer’s written application. The creditor is required to
deliver or mail the early disclosures no later than three business days after receiving
the consumer’s application and at least seven business days before consummation
(1026.19(a)(1)(i) and (iii) and 1026.19(a)(2)(i)). No fees may be charged before the
consumer receives the early disclosures except for credit report fees (1026.19(a). If
the APR stated in the early disclosures is not considered accurate under section
CFPB April 2015 TILA 95
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
1026.22 when compared to the APR at consummation, determine whether the creditor
provided corrected disclosures of all changed terms, including the APR, that the
consumer received no later than the third business day before consummation and that
the creditor delivered or placed in the mail the corrected disclosures not later than the
seventh business day before consummation. (1026.19(a)(2)(i)and (ii)
ii. Determine whether the creditor provides the disclosures required pursuant to 1026.33
(and found in paragraph d of the model form in appendix K) either three days prior to
consummation (for a closed-end transaction) or prior to the first transaction (for an
open-end credit plan). (1026.31(c)(2))
NOTE: For closed-end credit transactions secured by a dwelling not subject to the TILA-
RESPA rule, the prohibition on charging fees (other than credit report fees) before the
consumer receives the early TIL disclosure is more limited than the prohibition for
closed-end credit transactions secured by a dwelling that are subject to TILA-RESPA.
(1026.19(a)) For TILA-RESPA closed-end transactions, creditors are prohibited from
charging fees (other than credit report fees) prior to receipt of disclosures and an intent to
proceed with the transaction. (1026.19(e)(2))
c. Disclosures for high-cost mortgages. – Three business days prior to consummation or
account opening. If such disclosures became inaccurate due to a change by the creditor,
ensure that the creditor provided new, accurate disclosures no later than three business
days prior to consummation or account opening. (1026.31(c)(1))
d. Disclosures for initial rate change to an adjustable-rate mortgage securing a principal
dwelling (other than a transaction subject to 1026.19(e) and (f)) with terms of more than
one year:
i. For adjustable-rate mortgages, creditors, assignees, or servicers are generally required
to provide information regarding the first interest rate change to consumers between
210 and 240 days prior to the date the first payment at the new rate is due;
NOTE: If the first payment change occurs within the first 210 days, creditors,
assignees, or servicers are required to provide the disclosure at consummation.
(1026.20(d))
NOTE: When examining a creditor that continues to own the loan, an assignee, or a
servicer, if the entity states that another entity has the obligation to provide the
disclosures, examiners should determine whether the entity takes steps to ensure that
the other party (the creditor, assignee, or servicer, as applicable) is complying with
the obligation to provide the disclosures.
e. Additional disclosures for adjustable-rate mortgages securing a principal dwelling (other
than a transaction subject to 1026.19(e) and (f)) with a term of more than one year, where
a rate change affects the amount of payment:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 96
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
i. For adjustable-rate mortgages where the payment changes with a rate change,
disclosures must be provided to consumers between 60 and 120 days before the first
payment at the new rate is due;
ii. For adjustable-rate mortgages where the payment change is caused by a rate change
that is uniformly scheduled every 60 days (or more frequently), disclosures must be
provided to consumers between 25 and 120 days before the first payment at the new
rate;
iii. For adjustable-rate mortgages originated prior to January 10, 2015, where the interest
rate and payment are calculated based on an index that is available less than 45 days
prior to the change, disclosures must be provided between 25 and 120 days before the
first payment at the new rate is due; and
iv. For adjustable-rate mortgages where the payment adjustment occurs within 60 days
of consummation and the new interest rate after adjustment provided at
consummation was an estimate, disclosure are required as soon as practicable, but no
later than 25 days prior to the first payment at the new rate is due. (1026.20(c))
NOTE: The requirements of section 1026.20(c) do not apply to: ARMS with terms of one
year or less; first interest rate adjustments to an ARM if the first adjusted payment is due
within 210 days after consummation and the new interest rate disclosed at consummation
was not an estimate; or the creditor, assignee or servicer when the servicer is subject to
the Fair Debt Collections Practices Act (FDCPA) and the consumer has notified the
servicer to cease communication under section 805(c) of the FDCPA. (1026.20(c)(1)(ii))
f. Notice of new creditor. –On or before the 30th calendar day following the acquisition
(1026.39).
g. For private education loans subject to Subpart F (1026.46), determine that:
i. Application or solicitation disclosures were provided on or with any application or
solicitation (1026.46(d)(1)(i));
ii. Approval disclosures were provided before consummation on or with any notice of
approval provided to the consumer (1026.46(d)(2)); and
iii. Final disclosures were provided after the consumer accepts the loan and at least three
business days prior to disbursing the private education loan funds. (1026.46(d)(3))
h. Determine that the issuer provides a written over-the-limit notice prior to the assessment
of any over-the-limit fee or charge on a consumer’s account. (1026.56(d)(1)(i))
i. Determine that, if a consumer consents to the card issuer’s payment of any over-the-limit
transaction by oral or electronic means, the card issuer provides the required written
notice immediately prior to obtaining that consent. (1026.56(d)(1)(ii))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 97
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
j. Determine that the notice confirming the consumer’s consent is provided no later than the
first periodic statement sent after the consumer has consented to the card issuer’s
payment of over-the-limit transactions. The creditor must not assess an over-the-limit fee
on the consumer’s account without first providing written confirmation. (1026.56(d)(2))
k. Determine that the notice providing the consumer notice in writing of the right to revoke
consent following the assessment of an over-the-limit fee or charge is provided on the
front of any page of each periodic statement that reflects the assessment of an over-the-
limit fee or charge on a consumer’s account. (1026.56(d)(3))
l. For home-equity plans subject to the requirements of section 1026.40, whenever any term
required to be disclosed under section 1026.6(a) is changed or the required minimum
periodic payment is increased, determine that the creditor mails or delivers written notice
of the change to each consumer who may be affected. Determine that the notice is mailed
or delivered at least 15 days prior to the effective date of the change. If the change has
been agreed to by the consumer, determine that the notice is given before the effective
date of the change. (1026.9(c)(1)(i))
m. Notice to restrict credit. For home-equity plans subject to the requirements of section
1026.40, if the creditor prohibits additional extensions of credit or reduces the credit limit
pursuant to section 1026.40(f)(3)(i) or (f)(3)(vi), determine that the creditor mails or
delivers written notice of the action to each consumer who will be affected not later than
three business days after the action is taken and contains specific reasons for the action. If
the creditor requires the consumer to request reinstatement of credit privileges, determine
that the notice states that fact. (1026.9(c)(1)(iii))
Mortgage Loans Secured by Real Property—Early
Disclosures (Loan Estimates) – Section 1026.19(e)
Provision of Disclosures
1. For closed-end consumer loans secured by real property, other than a reverse mortgage
subject to section 1026.33, determine whether the creditor provides the consumer with good
faith estimates on the Loan Estimate (1026.37) or if the creditor satisfies its obligation by
ensuring that a mortgage broker providing the Loan Estimate complied with all requirements
of section 1026.19(e).
NOTE: Partial exemption. The special disclosure requirements of 1026.19(e) do not apply if
the loan is (i) a subordinate lien, (ii) a loan for buyer assistance such as down payments or
closing costs, rehabilitation loans, energy efficiency assistance, or foreclosure prevention,
(iii) a loan that does not require the payment of interest, (iv) a loan for which repayment that
is forgiven, deferred for 20 years, or deferred until the property is sold or is no longer the
consumer’s principal dwelling, or (v) a loan where the total costs of the transaction are less
than one percent of the loan and include fees only for recording, application and housing
CFPB April 2015 TILA 98
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
counseling. In addition to these requirements, the creditor must comply with other
requirements of Regulation Z, including the disclosures in section 1026.18. (1026.3(h))
Timing
1. Determine whether the creditor delivers or places in the mail the Loan Estimate not later than
the third business day after receiving the consumer’s application. As defined in section
1026.2(a)(3), an application consists of the submission for purposes of obtaining an extension
of credit of the consumer's name, income, social security number to obtain a credit report, the
property address, an estimate of the value of the property, and the mortgage loan amount
sought. (1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(A))
NOTE: When a consumer uses an online application system that allows the information to be
saved, the timing requirements for the Loan Estimate are not triggered until the application is
submitted.
2. Determine whether the creditor delivers or places in the mail the Loan Estimate not later than
the seventh business day before consummation (other than for transactions secured by a
consumer’s interest in a timeshare plan). (1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(B))
NOTE: Business day is defined differently for purposes of 1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(A) and (B). For
1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(A), business day is defined based on whether the creditor’s offices are
open to the public for carrying on substantially all of its business functions on that day. For
1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(B), a business day is all days except Sundays and federal holidays.
(1026.2(a)(6))
3. Determine whether the consumer waived the waiting period before consummation under
1026.19(e)(1)(iii)(B) by providing a dated written statement describing a bona fide personal
financial emergency, specifically modifying or waiving the waiting period, and signed by all
the consumers who are primarily liable on the obligation. (1026.19(e)(1)(v))
NOTE: Preprinted forms for this purpose are prohibited.
Shopping for Settlement Service Providers
1. Determine whether a creditor permits a consumer to shop for a settlement service and, if so,
identifies the settlement services the consumer is permitted to shop for. If so, determine
whether the creditor provides a written list identifying at least one available provider for each
settlement service for which the consumer may shop and stating that the consumer may
choose a different provider for that service. Determine that the creditor provides the written
list separately from initial Loan Estimate but in accordance with the same timing
requirements. (1026.19(e)(1)(vi))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 99
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Pre-Disclosure Activity
1. Fee restriction. Determine that the creditor does not charge any fees before the consumer
receives the Loan Estimate and before the consumer indicated to the creditor an intent to
proceed with the transaction, except for bona fide and reasonable credit report fees.
(1026.19(e)(2)(i)(A))
2. Disclaimer on early estimates. Determine whether a creditor that provides a consumer with a
written estimate of terms or costs specific to that consumer before the consumer receives the
Loan Estimate clearly and conspicuously states on the first page in no smaller than 12-point
font “Your actual rate, payment, and costs could be higher. Get an official Loan Estimate
before choosing a loan,” and that the estimate does not use a format or content substantially
similar to the Loan Estimate (form H-24 or H-25 of appendix H). (1026.19(e)(2)(ii))
3. Verification of information. Determine whether the creditor requires a consumer to submit
documents verifying information related to the consumer's application before providing the
creditor provides the Loan Estimate. (1026.19(e)(2)(iii))
Permissible variations
1. Determine whether the creditor disclosed estimated closing costs in good faith and consistent
with the best information reasonably available to the creditor at the time the disclosures are
provided. The estimated closing costs are in good faith if the amount charged to the
consumer at closing does not exceed the estimated closing costs disclosed on the Loan
Estimate, unless the following exceptions apply: (1026.19(e)(3))
10 Percent Cumulative Increase Permitted
1. Estimates for third party services or a recording fee are in good faith if:
a. The aggregate charges do not exceed the aggregate estimate for those charges by more
than 10 percent (1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(A));
b. The third party service charge is not paid to the creditor or affiliate of the creditor
(1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(B)); and
c. The creditor permits the consumer to shop for the third party service.
(1026.19(e)(3)(ii)(C))
Variations Permitted for Certain Charges
1. An estimate of the following is in good faith if it is consistent with the best information
reasonably available to the creditor at the time it is disclosed, regardless of whether the
amount paid by the consumer exceeds the amount disclosed in the Loan Estimate
(1026.19(e)(3)(iii)):
CFPB April 2015 TILA 100
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
a. Prepaid interest (1026.19(e)(3)(iii)(A));
b. Property insurance premiums (1026.19(e)(3)(iii)(B));
c. Amounts placed into an escrow, impound, reserve, or similar account (1026.19(e)(3)(iii)(C));
d. Charges paid to third-party service providers the consumer selected that are not on the list
provided by the creditor (1026.19(e)(3)(iii)(D)); and
e. Charges paid for third-party services not required by the creditor. These charges may be
paid to affiliates of the creditor (1026.19(e)(3)(iii)(E)).
Revised Loan Estimates
1. Determine whether the creditor provides a revised estimate of a charge for any of the
following reasons (1026.19(e)(3)(iv)):
a. Changed circumstances. Changed Circumstances that cause the estimated settlement
charges to increase or, in the case of estimated charges identified in section
1026.19(e)(3)(ii), cause the aggregate amount of such charges to increase by more than
10 percent. (1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A)) For purposes of this and the following procedure,
“changed circumstance” means:
i. An extraordinary event beyond the control of any interested party or other unexpected
event specific to the consumer or transaction (1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A)(1));
ii. Information specific to the consumer or transaction that the creditor relied upon when
providing the Loan Estimate and that was inaccurate or changed after the disclosures
were provided (1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A)(2)); or
iii. New information specific to the consumer or transaction that the creditor did not rely
on when providing the original Loan Estimate (1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(A)(3)).
b. Changed circumstance affecting eligibility. The consumer is ineligible for an estimated
charge previously disclosed because a changed circumstance affected the consumer's
creditworthiness or the value of the security for the loan. (1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(B))
c. Revisions requested by the consumer. The consumer requests revisions to the credit terms
or the settlement that cause an estimated charge to increase. (1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(C))
d. Interest rate dependent charges. The points or lender credits change because the interest
rate was not locked when the Loan Estimate was provided. (1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(D))
2. Determine whether, within three business days after the interest rate is locked, the creditor
provides a revised version of the Loan Estimate to the consumer with the revised interest
rate, the points disclosed pursuant to §1026.37(f)(1), lender credits, and any other interest
rate dependent charges and terms.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 101
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
3. Determine whether the consumer indicated an intent to proceed with the transaction more
than 10 business days after the Loan Estimate is provided. (1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(E))
4. Determine whether a creditor issuing a revised Loan Estimate in a new construction loan
states clearly and conspicuously that at any time prior to 60 days before consummation, the
creditor may issue revised disclosures. (1026.19(e)(3)(iv)(F))
Provision and Receipt of Revised Disclosures
1. Determine whether the creditor provides a revised Loan Estimate within three business days
of receiving information sufficient to establish a reason for a revised estimate and not later
than four business days prior to consummation. (1026.19(e)(4))
NOTE: If not provided to the consumer in person, the revised disclosure is considered to
have been received three business days after the creditor delivers or places the revised
disclosure in the mail. (1026.19(e)(4))
Special Information Booklet at Time of Application
1. Determine whether the creditor mailed or delivered a copy of the special information booklet,
“Shopping for Your Home Loan: Settlement Cost Booklet,” required by section 5 of RESPA,
within three business days after receiving the consumer’s application for a purchase
transaction, unless the creditor denies the application before the end of the three-day period.
NOTE: If the consumer uses a mortgage broker, the mortgage broker must provide the
special information booklet and the creditor need not do so. (1026.19(g))
Mortgage Loans Secured by Real Property—Final
Disclosures (Closing Disclosures) – Section 1026.19(f)
Provision of Closing Disclosures
1. Determine whether, for closed-end consumer loans secured by real property, other than a
reverse mortgage subject to section 1026.33 or loans otherwise excepted under 1026.3(h), the
creditor provides the consumer with the Closing Disclosure (1026.38), reflecting the actual
terms of the transaction. (1026.19(f)(1)(i))
NOTE: There is a partial exemption in section 1026.3(h) from the requirement to provide the
Loan Estimate and Closing Disclosure if the loan is (i) a subordinate lien, (ii) a loan for buyer
assistance such as down payments or closing costs, rehabilitation loans, energy efficiency
assistance, or foreclosure prevention, (iii) a loan that does not require the payment of interest,
(iv) a loan for which repayment that is forgiven, deferred for 20 years, or deferred until the
property is sold or is no longer the consumer’s principal dwelling, and (v) a loan where the
total costs of the transaction are less than one percent of the loan and include fees only for
recording, application and housing counseling. For those transactions, creditors must comply
CFPB April 2015 TILA 102
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
with all other applicable portions of TILA, including the disclosure requirements required
pursuant to 1026.18.
2. Determine whether the creditor ensures that the consumer receives the Closing Disclosure no
later than three business days before consummation (except for transactions secured by a
timeshare, which the creditor must ensure the consumer receives no later than
consummation). (1026.19(f)(1)(ii))
NOTE: If the creditor mails the disclosure six business days prior to consummation, it can
assume that it was received three business days after sending, and therefore three business
days prior to consummation. (1026.19(f)(1)(iii); see Comment 19(f)(1)(iii)) “Business day”
for purposes of the Closing Disclosure is the rescission-based business day definition, and
means all calendar days except Sundays and legal public holidays. (1026.2(a)(6),
1026.19(f)(1)(ii)(A))
3. Determine whether the consumer waived the waiting period before consummation by
providing a dated written statement describing a bona fide personal financial emergency,
specifically modifying or waiving the waiting period and signed by all the consumers who
are primarily liable on the obligation. (1026.19(f)(1)(iv))
NOTE: Preprinted forms for this purpose are prohibited. (1026.19(f)(1)(iv))
4. If a settlement agent provides the consumer with the Closing Disclosure, determine whether
the creditor ensures that the disclosures were provided in accordance with section 1026.19(f).
(1026.19(f)(1)(v))
Subsequent Changes
1. Determine whether the creditor provides a corrected Closing Disclosure where a disclosure
has become inaccurate before consummation, so that the consumer receives a corrected
Closing Disclosure at or before consummation. Determine whether the creditor permits the
consumer to inspect the corrected disclosure during the business day prior to consummation.
NOTE: the corrected Closing Disclosure must be completed to set forth items known to the
creditor at the time of this inspection but may omit from inspection items related only to the
seller’s transaction. (1026.19(f)(2)(i))
2. Determine whether the creditor provides a corrected Closing Disclosure and a new three-
business-day waiting period before consummation if:
a. The APR disclosed in the Loan Estimate under section 1026.38(o)(4) becomes
inaccurate, as defined in §1026.22 (1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(A));
b. The loan product is changed, causing the information disclosed in the Loan Estimate
under §1026.38(a)(5)(iii) to become inaccurate (1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(B)); or
CFPB April 2015 TILA 103
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
c. A prepayment penalty is added, causing the statement regarding a prepayment penalty
required under §1026.38(b) to become inaccurate. (1026.19(f)(2)(ii)(C))
3. Determine whether, when an event in connection with the settlement causes the Closing
Disclosure to become inaccurate during the 30-day period following consummation, and that
inaccuracy results in a change to an amount actually paid by the consumer from the amount
disclosed, the creditor delivers or places in the mail corrected disclosures not later than 30
days from receiving the information to establish that the event occurred. (1026.19(f)(2)(iii))
NOTE: A creditor does not violate section 1026.19(f)(1)(i) if the disclosures contain non-
numeric clerical errors, provided the creditor delivers or places in the mail corrected
disclosures no later than 60 days after consummation. (1026.19(f)(2)(iv))
4. Determine whether the creditor charged the consumer for any amounts that exceeded the
estimated charges beyond the applicable permissible variations set forth in section
1026.19(e)(3)(i) (no variation permitted for the charge) and (ii) (charge subject to a 10
percent aggregate limit). For any such charges, determine if the creditor refunds the excess
amounts no later than 60 days after consummation and delivers or places in the mail
corrected disclosures reflecting the refund no later than 60 days after consummation.
(1026.19(f)(2)(v))
Charges Disclosed
1. Determine whether the creditor or settlement service provider imposes a charge on the
consumer for more than the settlement service provider actually received. If the creditor
charges the average charge for settlement services, determine whether the creditor meets the
following:
a. The average charge is no more than the average amount paid for that service by or on
behalf of all consumers and sellers for a class of transactions (1026.19(f)(3)(ii)(A));
b. The class of transactions is defined by appropriate period of time, geographic area, and
type of loan (1026.19(f)(3)(ii)(B));
c. The same average charge is used for every transaction within the class
(1026.19(f)(3)(ii)(C)); and
d. The average charge is not used for any type of insurance or any charge based on the loan
amount or property value, and is not otherwise prohibited by law. (1026.19(f)(3)(ii)(D))
Transactions Involving a Seller
1. Determine whether the settlement agent provides the seller with the Closing Disclosure no
later than the day of consummation and, if during the 30-day period following
consummation, an event in connection with the settlement of the transaction occurs that
causes disclosures to become inaccurate and the inaccuracy results in a change to the amount
CFPB April 2015 TILA 104
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
actually paid by the seller from that disclosed under 1026.19(f)(4)(i), the settlement agent has
delivered or placed in the mail corrected disclosures not later than 30 days after receiving
information sufficient to establish that such an event has occurred. (1026.19(f)(4))
No Fee
1. Determine whether a creditor or servicer imposes a fee on any person as part of settlement
costs or otherwise for preparing or delivering Closing Disclosures. (1026.19(f)(5))
Electronic Disclosures
1. Assess compliance for an institution’s electronic disclosure requirements.
E-Sign Act
1. Disclosures may be provided to the consumer in electronic form, subject to compliance with
the consumer consent and other applicable provisions of the Electronic Signatures in Global
and National Commerce Act (E-Sign Act) (15 U.S.C. 7001 et seq.). The E-Sign Act does not
mandate that institutions or consumers use or accept electronic records or signatures. It
permits institutions to satisfy any statutory or regulatory requirements by providing the
information electronically after obtaining the consumer’s affirmative consent. Before consent
can be given, consumers must be provided with the following information:
a. Any right or option to have the information provided in paper or non-electronic form;
b. The right to withdraw the consent to receive information electronically and the
consequences, including fees, of doing so;
c. The scope of the consent (for example, whether the consent applies only to a particular
transaction or to identified categories of records that may be provided during the course
of the parties’ relationship);
d. The procedures to withdraw consent and to update information needed to contact the
consumer electronically; and
e. The methods by which a consumer may obtain, upon request, a paper copy of an
electronic record after consent has been given to receive the information electronically
and whether any fee will be charged.
2. The consumer must consent electronically or confirm consent electronically in a manner that
“reasonably demonstrates that the consumer can access information in the electronic form
that will be used to provide the information that is the subject of the consent.” After the
consent, if an institution changes the hardware or software requirements such that a consumer
may be prevented from accessing and retaining information electronically, the institution
must notify the consumer of the new requirements and must allow the consumer to withdraw
consent without charge.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 105
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
3. If the financial institution makes its disclosures available to consumers in electronic form,
determine that the forms comply with the appropriate sections – §1026.5(a)(1); §1026.15(b);
§1026.16(c); §1026.17(a)(1); §1026.17(g); §1026.19(c); §1026.23(b)(1); §1026.24(d);
§1026.31(b); §1026.40(a)(3); and §1026.60(a)(2)(v).
4. Card issuers may provide credit card agreements in electronic form under section 1026.58(d)
and (e) without regard to the consumer notice and consent requirements of section 101(c) of
the E-Sign Act. (1026.58(f))
Annual Report to the CFPB – Section 1026.57
1. If the card issuer was a party to one or more college credit card agreements in effect at any
time during a calendar year, verify that the card issuer submits to the CFPB an annual report
regarding those agreements in the form and manner prescribed by the CFPB. (1026.57(d)(1))
NOTE: A college credit card agreement is any business, marketing, or promotional
agreement between a card issuer and an institution of higher education (or an affiliated
alumni organization or foundation) in connection with which credit cards are issued to
college students at that institution of higher education. (1026.57(a)(5))
2. The annual report to the CFPB must include the following (1026.57(d)(2)):
a. Identifying information about the card issuer and the agreements submitted, including the
issuer’s name, address, and identifying number (such as an RSSD ID number or tax
identification number);
b. A copy of any college credit card agreement to which the card issuer was a party that was
in effect at any time during the period covered by the report;
c. A copy of any memorandum of understanding in effect at any time during the period
covered by the report between the card issuer and an institution of higher education or
affiliated organization that directly or indirectly relates to the college credit card
agreement or that controls or directs any obligations or distribution of benefits between
any such entities;
d. The total dollar amount of any payments pursuant to a college credit card agreement from
the card issuer to an institution of higher education or affiliated organization during the
period covered by the report, and the method or formula used to determine such amounts;
e. The total number of credit card accounts opened pursuant to any college credit card
agreement during the period covered by the report; and
f. The total number of credit card accounts opened pursuant to any such agreement that
were open at the end of the period covered by the report.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 106
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
3. If the card issuer is subject to reporting, determine if the card issuer submits its annual report
for each calendar year to the CFPB by the first business day on or after March 31 of the
following calendar year. (1026.57(d)(3))
The Submission of Agreements to the CFPB
– Section 1026.58(c)
1. For card issuers that issue credit cards under a credit card account under an open-end (not
home-secured) consumer credit plan, determine that the card issuer makes quarterly
submissions to the CFPB in the form and manner specified by the CFPB that contain:
a. Identifying information about the card issuer and the agreements submitted, including the
issuer’s name, address, and identifying number (such as an RSSD ID number or tax
identification number) (1026.58(c)(1)(i));
b. The credit card agreements that the card issuer offered to the public as of the last business
day of the preceding calendar quarter that the card issuer has not previously submitted to
the CFPB (1026.58(c)(1)(ii));
c. Any credit card agreement previously submitted to the CFPB that was amended during
the preceding calendar quarter and that the card issuer offered to the public as of the last
business day of the preceding calendar quarter as described in section 1026.58(c)(3)
(1026.58(c)(1)(iii)); and
d. Notification regarding any credit card agreement previously submitted to the CFPB that
the issuer is withdrawing, as described in section 1026.58(c)(4), (c)(5), (c)(6), and (c)(7)
(1026.58(c)(1)(iv)).
2. Verify that quarterly submissions were sent to the CFPB no later than the first business day
on or after January 31, April 30, July 31, and October 31, of each year. (1026.58(c)(1))
3. If a credit card agreement that previously has been submitted to the CFPB is amended, verify
that the card issuer submits the entire amended agreement to the CFPB, in the form and
manner specified by the CFPB, by the first quarterly submission deadline after the last day of
the calendar quarter in which the change became effective. (1026.58(c)(3))
NOTE: If a credit card agreement has been submitted to the CFPB, the agreement has not
been amended and the card issuer continues to offer the agreement to the public, no
additional submission regarding that agreement is required.
4. If a card issuer no longer offers to the public a credit card agreement that previously has been
submitted to the CFPB, ensure that the card issuer notifies the CFPB by the first quarterly
submission deadline after the last day of the calendar quarter in which the issuer ceased to
offer the agreement. (1026.58(c)(4))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 107
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
NOTE: A card issuer is not required to submit any credit card agreements to the CFPB if the
card issuer had fewer than 10,000 open credit card accounts as of the last business day of the
calendar quarter. (1026.58(c)(5)(i))
5. If an issuer that previously qualified for the de minimis exception ceases to qualify,
determine that the card issuer begins making quarterly submissions to the CFPB no later than
the first quarterly submission deadline after the date as of which the issuer ceased to qualify.
(1026.58(c)(5)(ii))
6. If a card issuer that did not previously qualify for the de minimis exception qualifies for the
de minimis exception, determine that the card issuer continues to make quarterly submissions
to the CFPB until the issuer notifies the CFPB that the card issuer is withdrawing all
agreements it previously submitted to the CFPB. (1026.58(c)(5)(iii))
7. A card issuer is not required to submit to the CFPB a credit card agreement if, as of the last
business day of the calendar quarter, the agreement is offered for accounts under one or more
private label credit card plans each of which has fewer than 10,000 open accounts and is not
offered to the public other than for accounts under such a plan. (1026.58(c)(6)(i))
NOTE: A private label credit card is one that is usable only at a single merchant or affiliated
group of merchants. A private label credit card plan is all private label credit card accounts
issued by a particular issuer with credit cards usable at the same single merchant or affiliated
group of merchants. (1026.58(b)(8))
8. If an agreement that previously qualified for the private label credit card exception ceases to
qualify, determine that the card issuer submits the agreement to the CFPB no later than the
first quarterly submission deadline after the date as of which the agreement ceased to qualify.
(1026.58(c)(6)(ii))
9. If an agreement that did not previously qualify for the private label credit card exception
qualifies for the exception, determine that the card issuer continues to make quarterly
submissions to the CFPB with respect to that agreement until the issuer notifies the CFPB
that the agreement is being withdrawn. (1026.58(c)(6)(iii))
NOTE: A card issuer is not required to submit to the CFPB a credit card agreement if, as of
the last business day of the calendar quarter, the agreement is offered as part of a product test
offered to only a limited group of consumers for a limited period of time, is used for fewer
than 10,000 open accounts, and is not offered to the public other than in connection with such
a product test. (1026.58(c)(7)(i))
10. If an agreement that previously qualified for the product testing exception ceases to qualify,
determine that the card issuer submits the agreement to the CFPB no later than the first
quarterly submission deadline after the date as of which the agreement ceased to qualify.
(1026.58(c)(7)(ii))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 108
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
11. If an agreement that did not previously qualify for the product testing exception qualifies for
the exception, determine that the card issuer continues to make quarterly submissions to the
CFPB with respect to that agreement until the issuer notifies the CFPB that the agreement is
being withdrawn. (1026.58(c)(7)(iii))
12. Verify that each agreement contains the provisions of the agreement and the pricing
information in effect as of the last business day of the preceding calendar quarter.
(1026.58(c)(8)(i)(A))
13. Verify that agreements do not include any personally identifiable information relating to any
cardholder, such as name, address, telephone number, or account number.
(1026.58(c)(8)(i)(B))
14. Verify that agreements are presented in a clear and legible font. (1026.58(c)(8)(i)(D))
15. Verify that pricing information is set forth in a single addendum to the agreement that
contains only the pricing information. (1026.58(c)(8)(ii)(A))
NOTE: With respect to information other than the pricing information that may vary between
cardholders depending on creditworthiness, state of residence, or other factors, issuers may,
but are not required to, include that information in a single addendum (the optional variable
terms addendum) to the agreement separate from the pricing addendum (1026.58(c)(8)(iii)).
16. If pricing information varies from one cardholder to another depending on the cardholder’s
creditworthiness or state of residence or other factors, verify that the pricing information is
disclosed either by setting forth all the possible variations (such as purchase APRs of 13
percent, 15 percent, 17 percent, and 19 percent) or by providing a range of possible variations
(such as purchase APRs ranging from 13 percent to 19 percent). (1026.58(c)(8)(ii)(B))
17. If a rate included in the pricing information is a variable rate, verify that the issuer identifies
the index or formula used in setting the rate and the margin. (1026.58(c)(8)(ii)(C))
18. If rates vary from one cardholder to another, verify that the issuer discloses such rates by
providing the index and the possible margins (such as the prime rate plus 5 percent, 8
percent, 10 percent, or 12 percent) or range of margins (such as the prime rate plus from 5 to
12 percent). (1026.58(c)(8)(ii)(C))
NOTE: The value of the rate and the value of the index are not required to be disclosed.
19. Determine that issuers do not provide provisions of the agreement or pricing information in
the form of change-in-terms notices or riders (other than the pricing information addendum
and the optional variable terms addendum). (1026.58(c)(8)(iv))
20. Determine that changes in provisions or pricing information are integrated into the text of the
agreement, the pricing information addendum or the optional variable terms addendum, as
appropriate. (1026.58(c)(8)(iv))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 109
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
The Posting of Agreements Offered to the Public
– Section 1026.58(d)
1. Determine that the card issuer posts and maintains on its publicly available website the credit
card agreements that the issuer is required to submit to the CFPB under section 1026.58(c).
(1026.58(d)(1))
2. With respect to an agreement offered solely for accounts under one or more private label
credit card plans (and the issuer does not post and maintain the agreements on its publicly
available website), determine that the issuer posts and maintains the agreement on the
publicly available website of at least one of the merchants where cards issued under each
private label credit card plan with 10,000 or more open accounts may be used.
(1026.58(d)(1))
3. Verify that agreements posted pursuant to section 1026.58(d) conform to the form and
content requirements for agreements submitted to the CFPB specified in section
1026.58(c)(8). (1026.58(d)(2))
4. Determine that agreements are posted in an electronic format that is readily usable by the
general public. (1026.58(d)(3))
5. Verify that agreements are placed in a location on its website that is prominent and readily
accessible by the public and accessible without submission of personally identifiable
information. (1026.58(d)(3))
6. Determine that the card issuer updates the agreements posted on its website at least as
frequently as the quarterly schedule required for submission of agreements to the CFPB
under section 1026.58(c). (1026.58(d)(4))
NOTE: If the issuer chooses to update the agreements on its website more frequently, the
agreements posted on the issuer’s website may contain the provisions of the agreement and
the pricing information in effect as of a date other than the last business day of the preceding
calendar quarter.
The Posting of Agreements for “Open” Accounts
– Section 1026.58(e)
1. With respect to any open (i.e., the cardholder can obtain extensions or there is an outstanding
balance on the account that has not been charged off) credit card account, determine that the
card issuer either:
a. Posts and maintains the cardholder’s agreement on its website; or
b. Promptly provides a copy of the cardholder’s agreement to the cardholder upon the
cardholder’s request.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 110
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
2. If the card issuer makes an agreement available upon request, ensure that the issuer provides
the cardholder with the ability to request a copy of the agreement both by:
a. Using the issuer’s website, such as by clicking on a clearly identified box to make the
request (1026.58(e)(1)(ii)), and
b. Calling a readily available telephone line the number for which is displayed on the
issuer’s website and clearly identified as to purpose. (1026.58(e)(1)(ii) and (e)(2))
3. If an issuer does not maintain a website from which cardholders can access specific
information about their individual accounts determine that the issuer makes agreements
available upon request by providing the cardholder with the ability to request a copy of the
agreement by calling a readily available telephone line the number for which is
(1026.58(e)(2)):
a. Displayed on the issuer’s website and clearly identified as to purpose; or
b. Included on each periodic statement sent to the cardholder and clearly identified as to
purpose.
4. Verify that the card issuer sends to the cardholder or otherwise make available to the
cardholder a copy of the cardholder’s agreement in electronic or paper form no later than 30
days after the issuer receives the cardholder’s request. (1026.58(e)(1)(ii))
5. Determine that agreements posted on the card issuer’s website or made available upon the
cardholder’s request conform to the form and content requirements for agreements submitted
to the CFPB specified in section 1026.58(c)(8). (1026.58(e)(3)(i))
6. If the card issuer posts an agreement on its website or otherwise provides an agreement to a
cardholder electronically, verify that the agreement is posted or provided in an electronic
format that is readily usable by the general public and is placed in a location that is
prominent and readily accessible to the cardholder. (1026.58(e)(3)(ii))
7. If agreements posted or otherwise provided contain personally identifiable information
relating to the cardholder, such as name, address, telephone number, or account number,
ensure that the issuer takes appropriate measures to make the agreement accessible only to
the cardholder or other authorized persons. (1026.58(e)(3)(iii))
8. Determine that agreements posted or otherwise provided set forth the specific provisions and
pricing information applicable to the particular cardholder. (1026.58(e)(3)(iv))
9. Determine that provisions and pricing information are complete and accurate as of a date no
more than 60 days prior to (1026.58(e)(3)(iv)):
a. The date on which the agreement is posted on the card issuer’s website under section
1026.58(e)(1)(i);
CFPB April 2015 TILA 111
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
b. The date the cardholder’s request is received under section 1026.58(e)(1)(ii) or (e)(2).
NOTE: Card issuers may provide credit card agreements in electronic form under section
1026.58(d) and (e) without regard to the consumer notice and consent requirements of
section 101(c) of the Electronic Signatures in Global and National Commerce Act (E Sign
Act) (15 U.S.C. 7001 et seq.). (1026.58(f))
Advertising (Open- and Closed-End)
1. For open- and closed-end loans, sample advertising copy, including any electronic
advertising, since the previous examination and verify that the terms of credit are accurate,
clear, balanced, and conspicuous. If triggering terms are used, determine that the required
disclosures are made (1026.16 and 1026.24).
a. For advertisements for closed-end credit:
i. If a rate of finance charge was stated, determine that it was stated as an APR.
ii. If an APR will increase after consummation, verify that a statement to that fact is
made.
iii. Determine whether there are deceptive or misleading statements or practices.
b. Determine that the creditor does not offer college students any tangible item to induce
such students to apply for or open an open-end consumer credit plan offered by such
creditor, if such offer is made:
i. On the campus of an institution of higher education;
ii. Near the campus of an institution of higher education; or
iii. At an event sponsored by or related to an institution of higher education. (1026.57(c))
c. If an open-end credit advertisement refers to an APR as “fixed” (or similar term),
determine 1) that the advertisement also specifies a time period that the rate will be fixed
and 2) that the rate will not increase during that period. (1026.16(f))
d. If an open-end credit advertisement used the word “fixed” or a similar word and no time
period is specified in which the rate will be fixed, determine that the rate will not increase
while the plan is open. (1026.16(f))
e. For any advertisement of an open-end (not home-secured) plan, if an APR or fee that may
be applied to the account is an introductory rate or introductory fee, determine that the
term introductory or intro is in immediate proximity to each listing of the introductory
rate or introductory fee in a written or electronic advertisement. (1026.16(g)(3))
f. For any advertisement of an open-end (not home-secured) plan, if any APR or fee that
may be applied to the account is a promotional rate under section 1026.16(g)(2)(i) or any
CFPB April 2015 TILA 112
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
fee that may be applied to the account is a promotional fee under section
1026.16(g)(2)(iv), determine that the following information is stated in a clear and
conspicuous manner in the advertisement (1026.16(g)(4)):
i. When the promotional rate or promotional fee will end and
ii. The annual percentage rate that will apply after the end of the promotional period.
NOTE: If such rate is variable, determine that the annual percentage rate complies with
the accuracy standards in sections 1026.60(c)(2), 1026.60(d)(3), 1026.60(e)(4), or
1026.16(b)(1)(ii), as applicable. If such rate cannot be determined at the time disclosures
are given because the rate depends at least in part on a later determination of the
consumer’s creditworthiness, determine that the advertisement discloses the specific rates
or the range of rates that might apply. (1026.16(g)(4)(ii)). Further, if the promotional rate
or fee is stated in a written or electronic advertisement, determine that the information in
sections 1026.16 (g)(4)(i), and, as applicable, (g)(4)(ii), or (g)(4)(iii) are also stated in a
prominent location closely proximate to the first listing of the promotional rate or
promotional fee.
g. If a deferred interest offer is advertised for an open-end account not subject to section
1026.40, determine that the deferred interest period is stated in a clear and conspicuous
manner in the advertisement. If the phrase “no interest” or similar term regarding the
possible avoidance of interest obligations under the deferred interest program is stated,
determine that the term “if paid in full” is also stated in a clear and conspicuous manner
preceding the disclosure of the deferred interest period in the advertisement. If the
deferred interest offer is included in a written or electronic advertisement, determine that
the deferred interest period and, if applicable, the term “if paid in full” are stated in
immediate proximity to each statement of “no interest,” “no payments,” “deferred
interest,” “same as cash,” or similar term regarding interest or payments during the
deferred interest period. (1026.16(h)(3))
h. If any deferred interest offer is advertised for an open-end account not subject to section
1026.40, determine that the (h)(4)(i) and (h)(4)(ii) language (of section 1026.16(h)(4) ) is
stated in the advertisement and is similar to Sample G–24 in appendix G. If the deferred
interest offer is included in a written or electronic advertisement, determine that this
information is stated in a prominent location closely proximate to the first statement of
“no interest,” “no payments,” “deferred interest,” “same as cash,” or similar term
regarding interest or payments during the deferred interest period. (1026.16(h)(4))
NOTE: The requirements in section 1026.16(h)(4) apply to any advertisement of an open-end
credit plan not subject to section 1026.40 (requirements for home equity plans) section
1026.16(h)(1). However, the requirements do not apply to an envelope or other enclosure in
which an application or solicitation is mailed, or to a banner advertisement or pop-up
advertisement linked to an application or solicitation provided electronically. (1026.16(h)(5))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 113
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Transactional Testing
NOTE: When verifying APR accuracies, use the OCC’s APR calculation model or other
calculation tool acceptable to your regulatory agency.
1. Review the financial institution’s closed-end and open-end transactions to ensure accuracy
and completeness.
Closed-End Credit Transactional Testing Procedures
1. For each type of closed-end loan being tested, determine the accuracy of the disclosures by
comparing the disclosures to the contract and other financial institution documents. (1026.17)
2. Determine whether the required disclosures were made before consummation of the
transaction and ensure the presence and accuracy of the items below, as applicable. (1026.18)
a. Creditor and loan originator name with Nationwide Mortgage Licensing System and
Registry (NMLSR) IDs on required documents as required under section 1026.36
b. Amount financed
c. Itemization of the amount financed (RESPA GFE may substitute)
d. Finance charge
e. APR
f. Variable rate information as follows for loans not secured by a principal dwelling or
secured by a principal dwelling with terms of one year or less:
i. Circumstances which permit rate increase
ii. Limitations on the increase (periodic or lifetime)
iii. Effect of the increase
iv. Hypothetical example of new payment terms that would result from an increase
g. Payment schedule including the number, amount, and timing of payments.
h. Total of payments
i. Demand feature
j. Total sale price (credit sale)
k. Prepayment
l. Late payment
CFPB April 2015 TILA 114
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
m. Security interest
n. Insurance and debt cancellation
o. Certain security interest charges
p. Contract reference
q. Assumption policy
r. Required deposit
s. Interest rate and payment summary for mortgage transactions
t. No-guarantee-to-refinance statement
3. For adjustable-rate mortgages, verify that the creditor, assignee, or servicer provides
disclosures in connection with the initial interest rate adjustment pursuant to the contract and
for rate changes that result in corresponding changes in payment.
4. For adjustable-rate mortgages, verify that the creditor, assignee, or servicer includes the
appropriate content (as identified in the Closed-End Credit Disclosure Forms Review
Procedures section above).
5. For adjustable-rate mortgages, verify that the creditor, assignee, or servicer provides the
disclosures consistent with timing requirements (see Timing Requirements section of the
procedures above).
NOTE: The accuracy of the adjusted interest rates and indexes should be verified by
comparing them with the contract and early disclosures. Refer to the Additional Variable
Rate Testing section of these examination procedures.
6. Determine, for each type of closed-end rescindable loan being tested, the appropriate number
of copies of the rescission notice are provided to each person whose ownership interest is or
will be subject to the security interest. The creditor must deliver two copies of the notice of
right to rescind to each consumer entitled to rescind. The rescission notice must disclose the
items below. (1026.23(b)(1))
a. Security interest taken in the consumer’s principal dwelling
b. Consumer’s right to rescind the transaction
c. How to exercise the right to rescind, with a form for that purpose, designating the address
of the creditor’s place of business
d. Effects of rescission
e. Date the rescission period expires.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 115
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
7. Ensure funding was delayed until the rescission period expired. (1026.23(c))
8. Determine if the consumer has waived the three-day right to rescind since the previous
examination. If applicable, test rescission waivers. (1026.23(e))
9. Determine whether the maximum interest rate in the contract is disclosed for any consumer
credit contract secured by a dwelling if the APR may increase after consummation.
(1026.30(a))
10. For private student loans with a right to cancel, review cancellation requests to determine if
they were properly handled. (1026.47(c))
Minimum Standards for Transactions Secured by a
Dwelling – Section 1026.43
1. Determine whether the financial institution is a creditor that originates covered transactions.
Covered transactions are transactions secured by a dwelling, including any real property
attached to a dwelling. They do not do not include: home equity lines of credit; timeshare
loans (except for the prepayment penalty provisions in section 1026.43(g)); reverse
mortgages; temporary, “bridge,” or construction loans of 12 months or less; renewable or
non-renewable construction loans of 12 months or less that are a part of a construction-to-
permanent transaction; or an extension of credit under a program administered by a Housing
Finance Agency (defined in 24 CFR 266.5), by community development or non-profit
lenders specified in section 1026.43(a)(3)(v), or in connection with certain federal emergency
economic stabilization programs. (1026.43(a))
2. Determine if a loan is a streamline refinance under section 1026.20(a) and Commentary
1026.20(a) and whether it qualifies under section 1026.43(d), below.
Refinancing Non-Standard Mortgages – Section 1026.43(d)
1. Determine whether a creditor that has refinanced a non-standard mortgage defined in section
1026.43(d)(i) (an ARM with an introductory rate fixed for a year or more, an interest-only
loan, or a negative amortization loan) into a standard mortgage as defined in section
1026.43(d)(ii) has considered whether the standard mortgage likely will prevent a default by
the consumer once the loan is recast. In addition, determine that the following conditions are
met (1026.43(d)(3)):
a. At the time of the refinance, the creditor for the standard mortgage is the current holder
of the existing non-standard mortgage or the servicer acting on behalf of the current
holder (1026.43(d)(2)(i));
b. The monthly payment for the standard mortgage is materially lower (a payment reduction
of 10 percent or more is sufficient) than the monthly payment for the non-standard
mortgage using the payment calculation rules in section 1026.43(d)(5)
(1026.43(d)(2)(ii));
CFPB April 2015 TILA 116
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
c. The creditor received the consumer’s written application for the standard mortgage no
later than two months after the non-standard mortgage had recast (1026.43(d)(2)(iii));
d. The consumer had made no more than one payment more than 30 days late on the non-
standard mortgage during the 12 months immediately before the creditor receives the
consumer’s written application for the standard mortgage (1026.43(d)(2)(iv));
e. The consumer had made no payments more than 30 days late during the six months
immediately before the creditor received the consumer’s written application for the
standard mortgage (1026.43(d)(2)(v)); and
f. If the non-standard mortgage was consummated on or after January 10, 2014, the non-
standard mortgage was made in accordance with the ability to repay or the qualified
mortgage requirements (1026.43(c) or (e)). (1026.43(d)(vi))
Ability to Repay – Section 1026.43(c)
NOTE: For all covered transactions, except streamline refinances, creditors must make a good
faith determination that the consumer will have a reasonable ability to repay the loan, and must
verify the information upon which it relied. A creditor can meet this obligation by complying
with the ability-to-repay requirement in section 1026.43(c) or by making qualified mortgages
under section 1026.43(e) and (f) (which limit certain risky loan features and practices), which are
presumed to satisfy the ability-to-repay requirements.
1. Determine whether the creditor makes a reasonable and good faith determination at or before
consummation that the consumer will have a reasonable ability to repay the loan according to
its terms, based (except as otherwise provided for loans under section 1026.43(d), (e), and (f)
for refinancing non-standard to standard mortgages, qualified mortgages, and certain balloon
qualified mortgages respectively), at a minimum, on the criteria set forth below.
(1026.43(c)(1))
2. Determine whether the creditor considered the following, at a minimum, in determining the
consumer’s ability to repay: (1026.43(c)(2))
a. The consumer’s current or reasonably expected income or assets (other than the value of
the dwelling, including any real property attached to the dwelling, that secures the loan);
(1026.43(c)(2)(i))
b. If the creditor relies on employment income, the consumer’s current employment status;
(1026.43(c)(2)(ii))
c. The consumer’s monthly payment on the covered transaction, calculated in accordance
with section 1026.43(c)(5); (1026.43(c)(2)(iii)) (see g. below)
d. The consumer’s monthly payment on any simultaneous loan that the creditor knows or
has reason to know will be made, calculated in accordance with section 1026.43(c)(6);
(1026.43(c)(2)(iv))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 117
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
e. The consumer’s monthly payment for mortgage-related obligations; (1026.43(c)(2)(v))
f. The consumer’s current debt obligations, alimony, and child support; (1026.43(c)(2)(vi))
g. The consumer’s monthly debt-to-income ratio or residual income in accordance with
section 1026.43(c)(7) and section 1026.43(c)(2)(vii) and (viii)); and
h. The consumer’s credit history (1026.43(c)(2)(viii)).
3. Determine whether the creditor verified the information it relied upon when considering the
eight factors listed above using reasonably reliable third-party records, except that special
rules apply for verification of income or assets, employment, and current debt obligations
that are not shown on the consumer’s credit report.
Income and Assets, Employment and Debt Obligations
1. For purposes of c. above, determine that the creditor verified the information that it relied on
using reliable third-party records except that:
a. A creditor may verify a consumer’s employment status orally if the creditor prepares a
written record of the information obtained orally; and (1026.43(c)(3)(ii))
b. A creditor that relies on a credit report to verify a consumer’s current obligations need
not independently verify obligations that the consumer lists on the application that are not
in the consumer’s credit report. (1026.43(c)(3)(iii))
2. For the purposes of c. above, determine whether the creditor verified the income or assets it
relied upon, by using third-party records that provide reasonably reliable evidence,
(1026.43(c)(4)) such as:
a. A tax-return transcript issued by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS); (1026.43(c)(4))
b. Copies of tax returns the consumer filed with the IRS or a state taxing authority;
(1026.43(c)(4)(i))
c. IRS Form W-2s or similar IRS forms used for reporting wages or tax withholding;
(1026.43(c)(4)(ii))
d. Payroll statements, including military Leave and Earnings Statements;
(1026.43(c)(4)(iii))
e. Financial institution records; (1026.43(c)(4)(iv))
f. Records from the consumer’s employer or a third party that obtained information from
the employer; (1026.43(c)(4)(v))
g. Records from a federal, state, or local government agency stating the consumer’s income
from benefits or entitlements; (1026.43(c)(4)(vi))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 118
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
h. Receipts from the consumer’s use of check cashing services; and (1026.43(c)(4)(vii))
i. Receipts from the consumer’s use of a funds transfer service. (1026.43(c)(4)(viii))
3. For employment status, if the creditor orally verified employment status, determine whether
the creditor prepared a written record of the information obtained orally. (1026.43(c)(3)(ii))
Monthly Payment Calculation
1. For purposes of b. 3 above, determine whether the creditor calculated the monthly payment
(except for balloon payment, interest-only and negative amortization loans) by using:
a. The fully indexed rate or any introductory interest rate, whichever is greater; and
monthly, fully amortizing payments that are substantially equal. (1026.43(c)(5))
b. For a loan with a balloon payment:
i. The maximum payment scheduled during the first five years after the date on which
the first regular periodic payment will be due for a loan that is not a higher-priced
covered transaction as defined under section 1026.43(b)(4); (1026.43(c)(5)(ii)(A)(1))
or
ii. The maximum payment in the payment schedule, including any balloon payment, for
a higher-priced covered transaction. (1026.43(c)(5)(ii)(A)(2))
c. For an interest-only loan:
i. The fully indexed rate or any introductory interest rate, whichever is greater; and
ii. Substantially equal, monthly payments of principal and interest that will repay the
loan amount over the term of the loan remaining as of the date the loan is recast.
(1026.43(c)(5)(ii)(B))
d. For a negative amortization loan:
i. The fully indexed rate or any introductory interest rate, whichever is greater; and
ii. Substantially equal, monthly payments of principal and interest that will repay the
maximum loan amount as defined in section 1026.43(b)(7) over the term of the loan
remaining as of the date the loan is recast. (1026.43(c)(5)(ii)(C))
Monthly Payment Calculation for Simultaneous Loans
1. For the purposes of b. 4 above, determine whether the creditor calculated the monthly
payment on any simultaneous loan that was used to determine the consumer’s repayment
ability, including any mortgage-related obligations, as follows:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 119
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
a. For a simultaneous loan that is a covered transaction, using the payment calculation rules
for covered transactions, described above (1026.43(c)(6)(i)); or
b. For a home equity line of credit, by using the periodic payment required under the terms
of the plan and the amount of credit drawn at or before consummation of the covered
transaction. (1026.43(c)(6)(ii)).
Monthly Debt-to-Income Ratio or Residual Income
1. When a creditor considers the consumer’s monthly debt-to-income ratio, determine whether
the creditor considered the ratio of the consumer’s total monthly debt obligations to the
consumer’s total monthly income. (1026.43(c)(7)(ii)(A))
a. Total monthly debt obligations means the total of: the monthly payment on the covered
transaction (as required by §1026.43(c)(2)(iii) and (c)(5)), simultaneous loans (as
required by §1026.43(c)(2)(iv) and (c)(6)), mortgage-related obligations (as required by
§1026.43(c)(2)(v)), and current debt obligations, alimony, and child support (as required
by §1026.43(c)(2)(vi)).
b. Total monthly income means the total of the consumer’s current or reasonably expected
income, including any income from assets (as required by §1026.43(c)(2)(i) and (4)).
2. If a creditor considers the consumer’s monthly residual income, determine whether the
creditor considered the consumer’s remaining income after subtracting the consumer’s total
monthly debt obligations from the consumer’s total monthly income. (1026.43(c)(7)(ii)(B))
Total monthly debt obligations and total monthly income are defined in section
1026.43(c)(7)(i)(A) and (B).
Qualified Mortgages – Section 1026.43(e)
1. Determine whether the creditor has complied with the ability-to-repay requirements of
section 1026.43(c) by making a loan that is a qualified mortgage, including a higher-priced
qualified mortgage, under the general qualified mortgage definition in section 1026.43(e) or
by making loans that are qualified mortgages because they are made pursuant to rules
promulgated by HUD or VA pursuant to 15 U.S.C. §1639c(b) for loans insured or guaranteed
loans by those agencies.7 (1026.43(e))
2. Except as provided in section 1026.43(e)(4), (5), (6), or (f) (all discussed below), a qualified
mortgage is a covered transaction:
a. That provides for regular, substantially equal, periodic payments, except for the effect
any interest rate change after consummation has on adjustable-rate mortgages or step-rate
mortgages (1026.43(e)(2)(i)) that do not:
7
HUD issued its final QM rule, effective January 10, 2014 (78 Fed. Reg. 75215, December 11, 2013), and VA issued its interim
final QM rule, effective May 9, 2014 (79 Fed. Reg. 26620, May 9, 2014).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 120
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
i. Result in an increase of the principal balance (1026.43(e)(2)(i)(A)), or
ii. Allow balloon payments or deferment of principal payments (except for balloon-
payment qualified mortgages described in section 1026.43(f) and (e)(6));
(1026.43(e)(2)(i)(B) and (C)).
b. For which the loan term does not exceed 30 years (1026.43(e)(2)(ii));
c. For which the total points and fees (as defined in §1026.32(b)(1)(i));
i. do not exceed the applicable thresholds of: (1026.43(e)(2)(iii) and (3))
A. $100,000 or over: 3 percent of the total loan amount (see §1026.32(b)(4)(i));
B. $60,000 or over but less than $100,000: $3,000;
C. $20,000 or over but less than $60,000: 5 percent of the total loan amount;
D. $12,500 or over but less than $20,000: $1,000; or
E. Less than $12,500: 8 percent of the total loan amount.
NOTE: These numbers will be annually adjusted for inflation on January 1.
ii. For transactions consummated on or before January 10, 2021, if the creditor or
assignee determined after consummation that the points and fees exceeded the
applicable threshold, the loan is not precluded from being a qualified mortgage if:
A. The loan otherwise meets the requirements of 1026.43(e)(2), (e)(4), (e)(5), (e)(6),
or (f), as applicable;
B. The creditor or assignee paid to the consumer certain amounts, described below,
within 210 days after consummation and prior to any of the following events:
1) The consumer institutes an action in connection with the loan;
2) The consumer provides a written notice to the creditor, assignee, or servicer
that the transaction’s total points and fees exceed the applicable threshold; or
3) The consumer becomes 60 days past due on the legal obligation; and
C. The amount paid to the consumer is not less than the sum of the following:
1) The dollar amount by which the transaction’s total points and fees exceeds the
applicable limit, and
2) Interest on the amount of excess points and fees, calculated using the contract
interest rate applicable during the period from consummation until the
payment is made to the consumer; and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 121
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
D. The creditor or assignee, as applicable, maintains and follows policies and
procedures for post-consummation review of points and fees for making the
above-described payments to consumers. (1026.43(e)(3)(iii) and (iv))
NOTE: The points and fees cure provision applies to the points and fees limits for all of
the qualified mortgage types defined in Regulation Z.
d. For which the creditor underwrites the loan, taking into account the monthly payment for
mortgage-related obligations, using: (1026.43(e)(2)(iv))
i. The maximum interest rate that may apply during the first 5 years after the date on
which the first regular periodic payment will be due; and
ii. Periodic payments of principal and interest that will repay either:
A. The outstanding principal balance over the remaining term of the loan. This
should be calculated as of the date the interest rate adjusts to the maximum
interest rate that may apply during the first 5 years after the date on which the first
regular periodic payment will be due, assuming the consumer will have made all
required payments as due prior to that date; or
B. The loan amount over the loan term;
e. For which the creditor considers and verifies at or before consummation the following:
(1026.43(e)(2)(v))
i. The consumer’s current or reasonably expected income or assets other than the value
of the dwelling (including any real property attached to the dwelling) that secures the
loan, in accordance with appendix Q and sections 1026.43(c)(2)(i) and (c)(4); and
ii. The consumer’s current debt obligations, alimony, and child support in accordance
with appendix Q and sections 1026.43(c)(2)(vi) and (c)(3); and
f. For which the ratio of the consumer’s total monthly debt to total monthly income at the
time of consummation does not exceed 43 percent. For purposes of section
1026.43(e)(2)(vi), the ratio of the consumer’s total monthly debt to total monthly income
is determined: (1026.43(e)(2)(vi))
i. In accordance with the standards in appendix Q; (1026.43(e)(2)(vi)(A)), except
ii. The creditor calculates the consumer’s monthly payment on: (1026.43(e)(2)(vi)(B))
A. The covered transaction, including the monthly payment for mortgage-related
obligations, in accordance with section 1026.43(e)(2)(iv) (see also a.4 above) and
B. Any simultaneous loan that the creditor knows or has reason to know will be
made, in accordance with sections 1026.43 (c)(2)(iv) and (c)(6) (see also h. in
“Ability to Repay” above).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 122
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Temporary Category of Qualified Mortgages8
– Section 1026.43(e)(4)
1. Determine whether the creditor has complied with the ability-to-repay requirements of
section 1026.43(c) by making loans that
a. Meet the requirements of section 1026.43(e)(2)(i) through (iii) (i.e., have substantially
equal, periodic payments; restrictions on loan features; a maximum 30-year term; and
points and fees— generally limited to a 3 percent threshold); and are
b. Eligible (except with regard to matters wholly unrelated to ability to repay) to be
purchased, guaranteed, or insured by the listed federal government sponsored entities or
agencies.9
Small Creditor Portfolio Loan Qualified Mortgages
– Section 1026.43(e)(5)
1. Determine whether a creditor has complied with the ability-to-repay requirements of section
1026.43(c) by making a qualified mortgage as follows:
a. The creditor satisfies the creditor requirements of section 1026.35(b)(2)(iii)(B), and (C),
which require that: (1026.43(e)(5)(D))
i. During the preceding calendar year, the creditor, together with its affiliates, originated
500 or fewer first-lien covered transactions; and
ii. As of the end of the preceding calendar year, the creditor had total assets of less than
$2 billion (this threshold will adjust annually).
NOTE: This category of qualified mortgages does not require a small creditor to operate
predominantly in a rural or underserved area.
8
The temporary QM rule does not apply to HUD loans or to VA loans because they are qualified mortgages pursuant to 12
U.S.C. §1639c(b)(3)(B)(ii)(I)-(II), which authorizes HUD and VA to promulgate QM rules. HUD issued its final QM rule,
effective January 10, 2014 (78 Fed. Reg. 75215, December 11, 2013), and VA issued its interim final QM rule, effective May 9,
2014 (79 Fed. Reg. 26620, May 9, 2014).
9
Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie Mae) or the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (Freddie Mac),
operating under the conservatorship or receivership of the Federal Housing Finance Agency pursuant to section 1367(a) of the
Federal Housing Enterprises Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 4617(a)); or any limited-life regulatory
entity succeeding the charter of either the Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac pursuant to §1367(i) of the Federal Housing Enterprises
Financial Safety and Soundness Act of 1992 (12 U.S.C. 4617(i)); the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development under
the National Housing Act; U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs; the U.S. Department of Agriculture pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
1472(h); or the Rural Housing Service. This provision expires on the effective date of a rule issued by each respective agency
pursuant to its authority under TILA §129C(b)(3)(ii) to define a qualified mortgage. These special rules in §1026.43(e)(4) are
available only for covered transactions consummated on or before January 10, 2021.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 123
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
b. The creditor makes a loan that meets the requirements for a qualified mortgage in section
1026.43(e)(2), other than section 1026.43(e)(2)(vi), and without regard to the standards in
appendix Q: (1026.43(e)(5)(A)), and
NOTE: This means, among other things, that the loan does not have negative amortization,
interest-only, or balloon payment features (1026.43(e)(2)(i)); has a loan term of 30 years or
less (((1026.43(e)(2)(ii)); points and fees are under certain thresholds (generally 3 percent)
(1026.43(e)(2)(iii)); and the creditor underwrites the loan, taking into account the monthly
payment for mortgage related obligations (1026.43(e)(2)(iv)). Further, the creditor considers
and verifies at or before consummation: the consumer’s current or reasonably expected
income or assets other than the value of the dwelling (including any real property attached to
the dwelling) that secures the loan, in accordance with the general repayment ability
standards; and the consumer’s current debt obligations, alimony, and child support in
accordance with the general repayment ability standards (1026.43(e)(5)(B))
c. Considers at or before consummation, the consumer’s monthly debt-to-income ratio or
residual income and verifies the debt obligations and income used to determine that ratio
in accordance with the repayment ability requirements of section 1026.43(c)(7), except
that the calculation of the payment for determining the consumer’s total monthly debt
obligations in section 1026.43(c)(7)(i)(A) is determined in accordance with section
1026.43(e)(2)(iv) (based on the maximum interest rate in the first five years after the date
the first periodic payment is due) instead of section 1026.43(c)(5) (fully indexed rate);
(1026.43(e)(5)(B))
d. The loan was not subject to a forward commitment at consummation, except to a person
that satisfies the requirements of sections 1026.35(b)(2)(iii) (B) and (C) (i.e., small
creditors) (1026.43(e)(5)(C)).
2. Determine whether the small creditor portfolio mortgage does not have a qualified mortgage
status because it was subject to a forward commitment at consummation, or the creditor has
transferred it in any circumstances other than where the transfer was:
a. Three years or more after consummation;
b. To a creditor that satisfies the requirements of section 1026.43(e)(5)(i)(D) of this section
(i.e., small creditors under section 1026.35(b)(2)(iii)(B) and (C));
c. Made pursuant to a capital restoration plan or other action under 12 U.S.C. 1831o, or to
actions or instructions of a conservator, receiver, or bankruptcy trustee, or to orders by or
agreements with a state or federal governmental agency with jurisdiction to examine the
creditor; or
CFPB April 2015 TILA 124
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
d. Made pursuant to a merger of the creditor and another person or the acquisition of the
creditor by another person, or the creditor’s acquisition of another person.
(1026.43(e)(5)(ii).
NOTE: If a small creditor portfolio qualified mortgage has lost its qualified mortgage status,
the creditor must have complied with the general ability-to-repay requirements under section
1026.43(c).
Balloon-Payment Qualified Mortgages Made by Certain
Small Creditors – Section 1026.43(f)
1. Determine whether a creditor has complied with the ability-to-repay requirements of section
1026.43(c) by making a qualified mortgage that provides for a balloon payment as follows:
a. The creditor satisfies the creditor requirements of section 1026.35(b)(2)(iii)(A),(B), and
(C), which require that: (1026.43(f)(1)(vi))
i. During any of the three preceding calendar years, the creditor extended more than 50
percent of its first-lien covered transactions on properties that are located in “rural” or
“underserved” counties;
ii. During the preceding calendar year, the creditor, together with its affiliates, originated
500 or fewer first-lien covered transactions; and
iii. As of the end of the preceding calendar year, the creditor had total assets of less than
$2 billion (this threshold will adjust annually).
b. Makes a loan that meets the requirements for a qualified mortgage in section
1026.43(e)(2)(i)(A) (substantially equal payments or ARMs or step-rate mortgages that
do not increase the principal balance), (e)(2)(ii) (loan term 30 years or less), (e)(2)(iii)
(points and fees under certain thresholds), and (e)(2)(v) (income, assets, and obligations
are considered and verified), but without regard to the standards in appendix Q:
(1026.43(f)(1)(iv)(A));
c. Determines that the consumer can make all of the scheduled payments under the loan and
the monthly payments for all mortgage-related obligations (excluding the balloon
payment) from the consumer’s current or reasonably expected income or assets (other
than the dwelling that secures the loan); (1026.43(f)(1)(ii))
d. Considers at or before consummation, the consumer’s monthly debt-to-income ratio or
residual income and verifies the debt obligations and income used to determine that ratio
in accordance with the repayment ability requirements of section 1026.43(c)(7), except
that the calculation of the payment for determining the consumer’s total monthly debt
obligations in section 1026.43(c)(7)(i)(A) is based on the scheduled payments for the
balloon-payment qualified mortgage in accordance with section 1026.43(f)(1)(iv)(A),
CFPB April 2015 TILA 125
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
together with the consumer’s monthly payments for all mortgage-related obligations
other than the balloon payment; (1026.43(f)(1)(iii))
e. The legal obligation provides for:
i. Scheduled payments that are substantially equal, calculated using an amortization
period that does not exceed 30 years, with
ii. An interest rate that does not increase over the term of the loan, and
iii. A loan term of five years or longer; (1026.43(f)(1)(iv)(A)-(C))
f. The loan was not subject to a forward commitment at consummation, except to a person
that satisfies the requirements of sections 1026.35(b)(2)(iii)(A), (B), and (C) (i.e., small
creditors serving rural or underserved counties).
2. Determine whether the balloon-payment qualified mortgage does not have qualified
mortgage status because it was subject to a forward commitment at consummation, or the
creditor has transferred it in any circumstances other than where the transfer was:
a. Three years or more after consummation;
b. To a creditor that satisfies the requirements of section 1026.43(f)(1)(vi) of this section
(i.e., meets the definition of 1026.35(b)(2)(iii)(A)-(C), establishing criteria for small
creditors serving rural or underserved counties);
c. Made pursuant to a capital restoration plan or other action under 12 U.S.C. 1831o, or to
actions or instructions of a conservator, receiver or bankruptcy trustee, or to orders by or
agreements with a state or federal governmental agency with jurisdiction to examine the
creditor; or
d. Due to a merger of the creditor with another person or the acquisition of the creditor by
another person or another person by the creditor. (1026.43(f)(2)(i) and (iv))
NOTE: If a balloon-payment qualified mortgage has lost its qualified mortgage status, the
creditor must have complied with the general ability-to-repay requirements under section
1026.43(c).
Temporary Balloon-Payment Qualified Mortgages Made by
Small Creditors – Section 1026.43(e)(6)
1. Determine whether a creditor has complied with the ability-to-repay requirements of section
1026.43(c) by making a qualified mortgage that meets the requirements of the small creditor
balloon-payment qualified mortgage definition in section 1026.43(f) (above), except that the
creditor requirement in section 1026.35(b)(2)(iii)(A) (operate predominantly in a rural or
underserved area) does not apply.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 126
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
NOTE: This temporary qualified mortgage category applies only to loans that are
consummated on or before January 10, 2016.
Prepayment Penalties – Section 1026.43(g)
1. Determine whether a mortgage is a covered transaction (which excludes HELOCs and
timeshares but, for purposes of the prepayment penalty provisions, includes reverse
mortgages, temporary loans, and loans made by certain community development, non-profit,
and other lenders otherwise excluded from ability-to-repay provisions under section
1026.43(a)). If yes, then the loan may not have a prepayment penalty unless:
a. It is a qualified mortgage under sections 1026.43(e)(2), (e)(4), (e)(5), (e)(6), or (f);
b. The prepayment penalty is otherwise allowed by law;
c. The mortgage has an APR that cannot increase after consummation; and
d. The loan is not a higher-priced mortgage loan, as defined in section 1026.35(a).
(1026.43(g)(1)).
NOTE: Covered transactions are generally prohibited from having prepayment penalties
unless certain conditions are met.
2. Determine if the prepayment penalty improperly exceeds the following percentages of the
outstanding balance prepaid:
a. 2 percent during the first two years following consummation;
b. 1 percent during the third year following consummation; and
c. 0 percent thereafter. (1026.43(g)(2))
3. Determine whether a creditor offering a consumer a mortgage with a prepayment penalty has
also offered the consumer an alternative without a prepayment penalty and the alternative:
(1026.43(g)(3))
a. Has an APR that cannot increase after consummation and has the same type of interest
rate (fixed or step rate) as the loan with a prepayment penalty;
b. Has the same loan term as the loan with a prepayment penalty;
c. Satisfies the periodic payment conditions under section 1026.43(e)(2)(i);
d. Satisfies the points and fees conditions under section 1026.43(e)(2)(iii), based on the
information known to the creditor at the time of the offer; and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 127
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
e. Is a loan for which the creditor has a good faith belief that the consumer likely qualifies,
based on the information known to the creditor at the time the creditor offers the loan
without a prepayment penalty. (1026.43(g)(3))
4. Determine whether a creditor offering a loan with a prepayment penalty through a mortgage
broker:
a. Presents the mortgage broker an alternative covered transaction without a prepayment
penalty that satisfies the requirements of section 1026.43(g)(3) (see c. above); and
b. Establishes by agreement that the mortgage broker must present to the consumer an
alternative covered transaction without a prepayment penalty offered by the creditor that
satisfies the requirements of section 1026.43(g) (see c. above); or another creditor, if the
other creditor offers a lower interest rate or a lower total dollar amount of discount points
and origination points or fees. (1026.43(g)(4))
5. Determine whether a creditor that is a loan originator, as defined in section 1026.36(a)(1),
who presents a covered transaction with a prepayment penalty offered by another person to
whom the loan would be assigned after consummation also presents the consumer an
alternative covered transaction without a prepayment penalty that satisfies the requirements
of section 1026.43(g), offered by the assignee; or another person offering a lower interest rate
or a lower total dollar amount of origination discount points and points or fees.
(1026.43(g)(5))
Evasion of Minimum Standards for Loans Secured By a
Dwelling – Section 1026.43(h)
1. Determine whether the creditor has structured credit secured by a dwelling that does not meet
the definition of open-end credit in section 1026.2(a)(20) as an open-end plan to evade the
requirements for minimum standards for loans secured by a dwelling.
High-Cost Mortgages, Reverse Mortgages, and Higher-
Priced Mortgages Loans – Sections 1026.32, 1026.33,
and 1026.35
1. Determine whether the financial institution originates consumer credit transactions subject to
Subpart E of Regulation Z; specifically, high-cost mortgages (1026.32), reverse mortgages
(1026.33), and “higher-priced mortgage loans” (1026.35).
2. In addition to reviewing high-cost mortgages, reverse mortgages, and higher-priced mortgage
loans for compliance with requirements in other subparts of Regulation Z (for example,
disclosure timing requirements under section 1026.19(a)), review such mortgages to ensure
the following:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 128
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
a. Required disclosures are provided to consumers in addition to, not in lieu of, the
disclosures contained in other subparts of Regulation Z. (1026.31(a))
b. Disclosures are clear and conspicuous, in writing, and in a form that the consumer may
keep. (1026.31(b))
c. Disclosures are furnished at least three business days prior to consummation or account
opening of a high-cost mortgage or a closed-end reverse mortgage transaction (or at least
three business days prior to the first transaction under an open-end reverse mortgage).
(1026.31(c))
d. Disclosures reflect the terms of the legal obligation between the parties. (1026.31(d))
e. If the transaction involves more than one creditor, that only one creditor provided the
disclosures. Where the obligation involves multiple consumers, ensure that the
disclosures were provided to any consumer who is primarily liable on the obligation.
Further, for rescindable transactions, verify that the disclosures were provided to each
consumer who has the right to rescind. (1026.31(e))
f. The APR is accurately calculated and disclosed in accordance with the requirements and
within the tolerances allowed in section 1026.22 for closed-end credit transactions and
section 1026.6(a) for open-end credit plans. (1026.31(g))
3. For high-cost mortgages (1026.32), ensure that, in addition to other required disclosures, the
creditor discloses the following at least three business days prior to consummation or account
opening (See model disclosure at App. H-16):
a. Notice containing the prescribed language. (1026.32(c)(1))
b. The APR. (1026.32(c)(2))
c. Regular payment and balloon payment. (1026.32(c)(3)).
d. For a closed-end credit transaction, the amount of regular loan payment and the amount
of any balloon payment. The disclosed regular payment should be treated as accurate if it
is based on an amount borrowed that is deemed accurate under section 1026.32(c)(5).
(1026.32(c)(3))
e. For an open-end credit plan:
i. An example showing the first minimum periodic payment for the draw period, the
first minimum periodic payment for any repayment period, and the balance
outstanding at the beginning of any repayment period. (1026.32(c)(3)(ii)(A))
NOTE: The example must be based on the assumption that the consumer borrows the full
credit line at account opening and does not obtain any additional extensions of credit, that
the consumer makes only the minimum periodic payments during the draw period and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 129
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
any repayment period, and that the APR used to calculate the example payments remains
the same during the draw period and any repayment period. Creditors must provide the
minimum period payment example based on the APR, except that if an introductory APR
applies, the creditor must use the rate that will apply to the plan after the introductory rate
expires. (§1026.32(c)(3)(ii)(A)-(C))
ii. If the credit contract provides for a balloon payment, a disclosure of that fact and an
example showing the amount of the balloon payment based on the assumptions
described in the note above. (1026.32(c)(3)(ii)(B))
iii. A statement that the example payments show the first minimum periodic payments at
the current annual percentage rate if the consumer borrows the maximum credit
available when the account is opened and does not obtain any additional extensions of
credit, or substantially similar statement. (1026.32(c)(3)(ii)(C))
iv. A statement that the example payments are not the consumer’s actual payments and
that the actual minimum periodic payments will depend on the amount the consumer
borrows, the interest rate applicable to that period, and whether the consumer pays
more than the required minimum periodic payment, or a substantially similar
statement. (1026.32(c)(3)(ii)(D))
f. For variable rate transactions, a statement that the interest rate and monthly payment may
increase, and the amount of the single maximum monthly payment allowed under the
contract based on the maximum rate required to be disclosed under section 1026.30.
(1026.32(c)(4))
g. For a closed-end credit transaction, the total amount the consumer will borrow (the face
amount of the note) and if this amount includes financed charges that are not prohibited
under section 1026.34(a)(10), that fact. This disclosure should be treated as accurate if
within $100 of the actual amount borrowed. For an open-end credit plan, the credit limit
for the plan when the account is opened. (1026.32(c)(5))
4. For high-cost mortgages (1026.32), ensure that the creditor follows these additional rules
concerning the disclosures required by section 1026.32(c):
a. Determine if a new disclosure is required if, subsequent to providing the additional
disclosure but prior to consummation or account opening, the creditor changes any terms
that make the disclosures inaccurate. For example, if a consumer finances the payment of
premiums or other charges as permitted under section 1026.34(a)(10) and, as a result, the
monthly payment differs from the payment previously disclosed, re-disclosure is required
and a new three-day waiting period applies. (1026.31(c)(1)(i))
b. Determine if a creditor provides new disclosures by telephone when the consumer
initiates a change in terms, then prior to or at consummation or account opening the
creditor must provide new written disclosures and both parties must sign a statement that
CFPB April 2015 TILA 130
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
these new disclosures were provided by telephone at least three days prior to
consummation or account opening. (1026.31(c)(1)(ii))
c. If a consumer waives the right to a three-day waiting period to meet a bona fide personal
financial emergency, the consumer’s waiver must be a dated written statement (not a pre-
printed form) describing the emergency and bearing the signature of all the consumers
entitled to the waiting period (a consumer can waive only after receiving the required
disclosures and prior to consummation or account opening). (1026.31(c)(1)(iii))
5. For high-cost mortgages (1026.32) determine that the creditor has not included any of the
following loan terms:
a. A payment schedule that provides for a balloon payment (with exceptions).
(1026.32(d)(1)(i)-(iii))
b. Negative amortization. (1026.32(d)(2))
c. Advance payments from the proceeds of more than 2 periodic payments. (1026.32(d)(3))
d. Increased interest rate after default. (1026.32(d)(4))
e. A rebate of interest, arising from a loan acceleration due to default, calculated by a
method less favorable than the actuarial method. (1026.32(d)(5))
f. Prepayment penalty as defined in section 1026.32(b)(6).
g. A due-on-demand clause that permits the creditor to terminate the loan in advance of
maturity and accelerate the balance, except in cases of fraud or material
misrepresentation by the consumer, failure by the consumer to meet the repayment terms
of the agreement for any outstanding balance, or action or inaction by the consumer that
adversely affects the creditor’s security interest in the loan. (1026.32(d)(8))
6. For high-cost mortgages under section 1026.32, determine that the creditor is not engaged in
the following acts and practices:
a. Home improvement contracts – Paying a contractor under a home improvement contract
from the proceeds of a mortgage unless certain conditions are met. (1026.34(a)(1))
b. Notice to assignee – Selling or otherwise assigning a high-cost mortgage without
furnishing the required statement to the purchaser or assignee. (1026.34(a)(2))
c. Refinancing within one year of extending credit – Within one year of making a high-cost
mortgage, a creditor may not refinance any high-cost mortgage to the same consumer into
another high-cost mortgage that is not in the consumer’s interest. This also applies to
assignees that hold or service the high-cost mortgage. Commentary to 1026.34(a)(3) has
examples applying the refinancing prohibition and addressing “consumer’s interest.”
(1026.34(a)(3))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 131
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
d. Extending high-cost mortgage credit without regard to the consumer’s repayment ability.
(Temporary or bridge loans with a term of 12 months or less are exempt from this
requirement.) (1026.34(a)(4)):
i. For closed-end credit transactions that are high-cost mortgages, ensure the creditor is
complying with the repayment ability requirements set forth in section 1026.43
ii. For open-end credit plans that are high-cost mortgages, ensure the creditor is not
extending credit without regard to the consumer’s repayment ability as of account
opening, including the consumer’s current and reasonably expected income, current
obligations, assets other than collateral, and employment. A creditor must determine
repayment ability for open-end high-cost mortgages by:
A. Verifying amounts of income or assets that it relies on to determine repayment
ability, including expected income or assets, by the consumer’s Internal Revenue
Service Form W-2, tax returns, payroll receipts, financial institution records, or
other third-party documents that provide reasonably reliable evidence of the
consumer’s income or assets.
B. Verifying the consumer’s current obligations, including any mortgage-related
obligations that are required by another credit obligation undertaken prior to or at
account opening and secured by the same dwelling that secures the high-cost
mortgage.
iii. Alternatively determines whether the creditor complies with the repayment ability
requirement by:
A. Verifying repayment ability as described above;
B. Determining the consumer’s repayment ability by using the largest required
minimum periodic payment based on the assumptions that:
1) The consumer borrows the full credit line at account opening with no
additional extensions of credit;
2) The consumer makes only required minimum periodic payments during the
draw period and any repayment period
3) If the annual percentage rate can increase during the plan, the maximum
percentage rate that is included in the contract; and
C. Assessing the consumer’s repayment ability, taking into account at least one of
the following: the ratio of total debt obligations to income (including any
mortgage-related obligations that are required by another credit obligation
undertaken prior to or at account opening, and are secured by the same dwelling
that secures the high-cost mortgage transaction, or the income the consumer will
have after paying debt obligations. (1026.34(a)(4)).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 132
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
e. Pre-loan counseling – Determine whether the creditor extending a high-cost mortgage
received written certification confirming that the consumer received approved home
ownership counseling after receiving the initial GFE or, for open-end credit plans, the
initial TILA disclosure required by section 1026.40, or if neither of those disclosures are
provided, after receiving the disclosures required by section 1026.32(c). (1026.34(a)(5)).
Requirements include:
i. Verify that home ownership counseling was not provided by an employee or affiliate
of the creditor
ii. If the creditor paid fees associated with homeownership counseling, confirm that the
payment was not contingent upon the consumer obtaining the high-cost mortgage or
receipt of a counseling certification
iii. Verify that the counseling certificate contains the name of the consumer, date of
counseling, name and address of the counselor, and statements required by section
1026.34(a)(5)(iv).
7. Late Fees – For high-cost mortgages, confirm that late payment charges are disclosed in the
terms of the loan contract or open-end credit agreement and that such fees do not exceed four
percent of the amount past due. No such charge may be imposed more than once for a single
late payment. (1026.34(a)(8))
Higher-Priced Mortgage Loans: Appraisals10
1. For higher-priced mortgage loans secured by principal dwelling that are not exempt under
section 1026.35(c)(2), determine whether, before consummation, the creditor obtained a
written appraisal from a state-licensed or certified appraiser that included a physical visit to
the interior of the dwelling. (1026.35(c)(3))
NOTE: Section 1026.35(c)(2) exempts several types of loans from the appraisal
requirements, including qualified mortgages under section 1026.43.
2. Determine whether the creditor is deemed to comply with the requirement by:
a. Ordering that the appraiser perform the appraisal in conformity with the Uniform
Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice and title XI of FIRREA and any
implementing regulations. (1026.35(c)(3)(ii)(A))
b. Verifying through the National Registry that the appraiser who signed the appraiser’s
certification was a certified or licensed appraiser in the state in which the appraised
10
The higher-priced mortgage loans appraisal requirement was adopted pursuant to an interagency rulemaking conducted by the
Board, the CFPB, the FDIC, FHFA, NCUA and OCC. The Board codified the rule at 12 CFR 226.43, and the OCC codified the
rule at 12 CFR Part 34 and 12 CFR Part 164. There is no substantive difference among these three sets of rules.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 133
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
property is located as of the date the appraiser signed the appraiser’s certification.
(1026.35(c) (3)(ii)(B))
c. Confirming that the appraisal includes elements set forth in appendix N.
(1026.35(c)(ii)(3)(C))
d. Having no actual knowledge contrary to the facts or certifications contained in the written
appraisal.
3. Assess whether the creditor exercised reasonable diligence in determining if a second interior
appraisal was necessary. A creditor can exercise reasonable diligence by basing its
determination on written source documents such as:
a. A copy of the recorded deed from the seller.
b. A copy of a property tax bill.
c. A copy of any owner’s title insurance policy obtained by the seller.
d. A copy of the RESPA settlement statement from the seller’s acquisition.
e. A property sales history report or title report from a third-party reporting service.
f. Sales price data recorded in multiple listing services.
g. Tax assessment records or transfer tax records obtained from local governments.
h. A written appraisal performed in compliance with section 1026.35(c)(3)(i) for the same
transaction.
i. A copy of a title commitment report detailing the seller’s ownership of the property.
j. A property abstract (1026.35(c)(4)(i) and (vi); see appendix O).
4. For higher-priced mortgage loans that are not exempt under section 1026.35(c)(2) or section
1026.35(c)(4)(vii), determine whether an additional written interior appraisal from a state
certified or licensed appraiser was both required and performed because the seller acquired
the property 180 days or less before the consumer’s purchase agreement, and the sales price
increased:
a. Greater than 10 percent over the previous purchase price, if acquired 90 or fewer days
prior to the consumer’s purchase agreement; or (1026.35(c)(4)(i)(A)) or
b. Greater than 20 percent over the previous purchase price, if acquired 91 to 180 days prior
to the consumer’s purchase agreement. (1026.35(C)(4)(i)(B))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 134
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
NOTE: Section 1026.35(c)(4)(vii) provides for eight exemptions from the second appraisal
requirement, such as for extensions of credit to finance the acquisition of property from a
local, state, or federal government agency.
5. For higher-priced mortgage loans (that are not exempt under section 1026.35(c)(2) or section
1026.35(c)(4)(vii)) where the creditor is required to obtain a second interior appraisal:
a. Confirm that the creditor obtained an appraisal from a different state certified or licensed
appraiser than the one who conducted the first appraisal. (1026.35(c)(4)(ii))
b. Confirm that the creditor charged the consumer for only one of the appraisals.
(1026.35(c)(4)(v))
NOTE: Reviewing the HUD-1 may assist in identifying whether a second appraisal fee was
charged to the consumer.
c. For higher-priced mortgage loans that are not exempt under section 1026.35(c)(2),
determine that the creditor provided a written disclosure in a timely manner informing
consumers that an appraisal may be necessary and that there is a cost associated with the
appraisal, as specified in section 1026.35(c)(5).
i. Disclosures must be provided to consumers within three business days after receipt of
an application for a higher-priced mortgage loan. A creditor can meet this
requirement by placing the disclosure in the mail within three business days after
receipt of the application for a higher-priced mortgage loan. (1026.35(c)(5)(ii))
ii. If the loan becomes a higher-priced mortgage loan during the application process, but
after initial receipt of the application, a creditor has three business days from the time
the loan became a higher priced mortgage loan to provide the necessary disclosure.
(1026.35(c)(5)(ii))
d. Confirm that the creditor provided consumers with a free copy of any written appraisal
performed in connection with a higher-priced mortgage loan that is not exempt under
section 1026.35(c)(2). (1026.35(c)(6))
i. Determine whether the creditor is providing consumers with a copy of their
appraisal(s) no later than three business days prior to consummation of the loan;
(1026.35(c)(6)(ii)(A)) or
ii. If the loan is not consummated, determine whether the creditor is providing
consumers with a copy of the appraisal(s) within 30 days after determining that the
loan will not be consummated. (1026.35(c)(6)(ii)(B))
NOTE: The creditor can satisfy this disclosure requirement by providing the
disclosure required in Regulation B, 12 CFR 1002.14(a)(2), related to a free copy of
the appraisal. (1026.35(c)(5)). However, unlike the waiver provision in Regulation B,
a consumer may not waive the timing requirement to receive a copy of the appraisal
CFPB April 2015 TILA 135
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
under §1026.35(c)(6)(i). In addition, the creditor must use the earliest applicable
timing requirement to comply with each regulation’s appraisal/valuation disclosure
requirements.
Higher-Priced Mortgage Loans: Escrow Accounts
1. For most higher-priced mortgage loans secured by a first lien on a principal dwelling escrow
accounts must be established before consummation for property taxes and premiums for
mortgage-related insurance required by the creditor. (1026.35(b)(1))
2. For higher-priced mortgage loans where the creditor did not establish an escrow account,
determine whether the transaction or the creditor would fall into an exemption.
(1026.35(b)(2))
a. Is the transaction secured by shares in a cooperative (1026.35(b)(2)(i)(A));
b. Is the transaction to finance the initial construction of the dwelling (1026.35(b)(2)(i)(B));
c. Is the transaction a temporary or “bridge” loan with a term less than 12 months
(1026.35(b)(2)(i)(C));
d. Is the transaction a reverse mortgage transaction under section 1026.33
(1026.35(b)(2)(i)(D));
NOTE: There is a limited exemption for transactions secured by a dwelling in a
condominium, planned unit development, or other “common interest community” where
a dwelling ownership requires participation in a governing association that is obligated to
maintain a master insurance policy insuring all dwellings. In these common interest
communities, creditors must maintain an escrow account for the payment of taxes only.
(1026.35(b)(2)(ii))
e. Does the creditor, or loan originator, qualify for an exemption under sections
1026.35(b)(2)(iii)(A)-(D):
i. During any of the three preceding calendar years, it made over half its covered
transactions in counties that meet the definition of “rural” or “underserved” as laid
out in section 1026.35(b)(2)(iv);
ii. Together with any affiliates, it did not make more than 500 covered transactions in
the preceding calendar year;
iii. It had less than $2 billion in total assets as of the end of the preceding calendar year;
and
iv. Neither the creditor nor its affiliate maintains an escrow account of the type described
in section 1026.35(b)(1) for any extension of consumer credit secured by real
property or a dwelling that the creditor or its affiliate currently services, other than:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 136
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
A. Escrow accounts established for first-lien higher-priced mortgage loans on or after
April 1, 2010, and before January 1, 2014; or
B. Escrow accounts established after consummation as an accommodation to
distressed consumers to assist such consumers in avoiding default or foreclosure.
NOTE: The asset threshold will adjust automatically each year, based on the year-to-
year change in the average of the Consumer Price Index for Urban Wage Earners and
Clerical Workers, not seasonally adjusted, for each 12-month period ending in
November, with rounding to the nearest million dollars (see comment 35(b)(2)(iii)-
1.iii for the current threshold).
3. Evasion of requirements: Ensure that the creditor does not structure a higher-priced mortgage
loan as an open-end plan (“spurious open-end credit”) to evade the requirements of
Regulation Z. (1026.35(d))
Prohibited Payments to Loan Originators
1. Determine that, in connection with a closed-end consumer credit transaction secured by a
dwelling,11 no loan originator receives and no person pays to a loan originator, directly or
indirectly, compensation12 that is based on:
NOTE: The term “loan originator” means, a person who, in expectation of direct or indirect
compensation or other monetary gain or for direct or indirect compensation or other
monetary gain: takes an application, offers, arranges, assists a consumer in obtaining or
applying to obtain, negotiates, or otherwise obtains or makes an extension of consumer credit
for another person; or through advertising or other means of communication represents to the
public that such person can or will perform any of these activities. The term “loan originator”
includes an employee, agent, or contractor of the creditor or loan originator organization if
the employee, agent, or contractor meets this definition. The term “loan originator” also
includes a creditor that engages in loan origination activities if the creditor does not finance
the transaction at consummation out of the creditor’s own resources, including by drawing on
a bona fide warehouse line of credit or out of deposits held by the creditor.
NOTE: A person is not a loan originator who does not take a consumer credit application or
offer or negotiate credit terms available from a creditor to that consumer based on the
consumer’s financial characteristics, but who performs purely administrative or clerical tasks
on behalf of a person who does engage in such activities. An employee of a manufactured
home retailer who does not take a consumer credit application, offer or negotiate credit
terms, or advise a consumer on credit terms is not a loan originator. For purposes of section
11
Sections 1026.36(d) and (e) do not apply to a home-equity line of credit subject to section 1026.40 or to a loan that is secured
by a consumer’s interest in a timeshare plan described in 11 U.S.C. 101(53D). (1026.36(b))
12
Compensation includes salaries, commissions, and any financial or similar incentive, such as an annual or periodic bonus or
awards of merchandise, services, trips, or similar prizes. See 12 CFR §1026.36(a)(3) and comment 1026.36(a)-5.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 137
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
1026.36(a), “credit terms” include rates, fees or other costs, and a consumer’s financial
characteristics include any factors that may influence a credit decision, such as debts,
income, assets or credit history.
a. A term of a transaction, the terms of multiple transactions by an individual loan
originator, or the terms of multiple transactions by multiple individual loan originators, or
NOTE: For purposes of section 1026.36(d)(1) only, a “term of a transaction” is any right or
obligation of the parties to a credit transaction. The amount of credit extended is not a term of
a transaction or a proxy for a term of a transaction, provided that compensation received by
or paid to a loan originator, directly or indirectly, is based on a fixed percentage of the
amount of credit extended; however, such compensation may be subject to a minimum or
maximum dollar amount. (1026.36(d)(1)(ii))
b. A proxy13 for a term of a transaction. (1026.36(d)(1)(i))
2. Determine that a loan originator that receives a contribution to a defined contribution, tax-
advantaged plan that meets the applicable requirements of the Internal Revenue Code does
not receive a contribution that is directly or indirectly based on the terms of the individual
loan originator’s transactions. (1026.36(d)(1)(iii))
3. Determine whether an individual loan originator receives compensation pursuant to a non-
deferred, profits-based compensation plan only if:
a. The compensation paid to an individual loan originator is not directly or indirectly based
on the terms of that individual loan originator’s transactions that are subject to section
1026.36(d); and
b. At least one of the following conditions is satisfied:
i. The compensation paid to an individual loan originator does not, in the aggregate,
exceed 10 percent of the individual loan originator’s total compensation
corresponding to the time period for which the compensation under the non-deferred
profits-based compensation plan is paid; or
ii. The individual loan originator was a loan originator for ten or fewer transactions
consummated during the 12-month period preceding the date of the compensation
determination.
Prohibition on Dual Compensation
1. If any loan originator receives compensation directly from a consumer in a closed-end
consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling, determine that (1026.36(d)(2)):
13
A factor that is not itself a term of a transaction is a proxy for a term of the transaction if the factor consistently varies with
that term over a significant number of transactions, and the loan originator has the ability, directly or indirectly, to add, drop, or
change the factor in originating the transaction. (1026.36(d)(1)(i))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 138
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
a. No loan originator receives compensation, directly or indirectly, from any person other
than the consumer in connection with the transaction (1026.36(d)(2)(i)(A)(1)) except that
a loan originator organization may receive compensation from a consumer and pay
compensation to its individual loan originator ; and
b. No person who knows or has reason to know of the consumer-paid compensation to the
loan originator (other than the consumer) pays any compensation to a loan originator,
directly or indirectly, in connection with the transaction. (1026.36(d)(2)(i)(A)(2))
NOTE: Loan originator organizations are permitted to compensate their employees if the
organization receives compensation directly from a consumer, subject to the prohibition
on payments to loan originators in section 1026.36(d)(1).
Prohibition on Steering
1. Determine that, in connection with a consumer credit transaction secured by a dwelling, a
loan originator does not direct or “steer” a consumer to consummate a transaction based on
the fact that the originator will receive greater compensation from the creditor in that
transaction than in other transactions the originator offered or could have offered to the
consumer, unless the consummated transaction is in the consumer’s interest. (1026.36(e)(1))
NOTE: The rule provides a safe harbor to facilitate compliance with the prohibition on steering
in section 1026.36(e)(1). The loan originator is deemed to comply with the anti-steering
prohibition if the consumer is presented with loan options that meet all of the following
conditions for each type of transaction in which the consumer expressed an interest:14
a. The loan originator obtains loan options from a significant number of the creditors with
which the originator regularly does business and, for each type of transaction in which
the consumer expressed an interest, presents the consumer with loan options that include
(1026.36(e)(3)(i)):
i. The loan with the lowest interest rate; (1026.36(e)(3)(i)(A))
ii. The loan with the lowest interest rate without negative amortization, a prepayment
penalty, interest-only payments, a balloon payment in the first seven years of the life
of the loan, a demand feature, shared equity, or shared appreciation; or, in the case of
a reverse mortgage, a loan without a prepayment penalty, or shared equity or shared
appreciation; and (1026.36(e)(3)(i)(B))
iii. The loan with the lowest total dollar amount of discount points, origination points or
origination fees (or, if two or more loans have the same total dollar amount of
discount points, origination points or origination fees, the loan with the lowest interest
14
The term ‘‘type of transaction’’ refers to whether: (i) A loan has an APR that cannot increase after consummation; (ii) A loan
has an APR that may increase after consummation; or (iii) A loan is a reverse mortgage. (1026.36(e)(2))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 139
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
rate that has the lowest total dollar amount of discount points, origination points or
origination fees). (1026.36(e)(3)(i)(C))
b. The loan originator has a good faith belief that the options (presented to the consumer
that are set forth, above) are loans for which the consumer likely qualifies.
(1026.36(e)(3)(ii))
c. For each type of transaction, if the originator presents to the consumer more than three
loans, the originator highlights the loans that satisfy options 1.i, 1.ii, and 1.iii above.
(1026.36(e)(3)(iii))
NOTE: If the requirements set forth in section 1026.36(e) are met, the loan originator
can, without steering, present fewer than three loans. (1026.36(e)(4))
Loan Originator Qualifications15 and Documentation
1. Determine whether the loan originator organization complies with all applicable state law
requirements for legal existence and foreign qualification. (1026.36(f)(1))
2. Determine whether the loan originator organization ensures that individual loan originators
who work for it (e.g., employees, under a brokerage agreement) are licensed or registered as
required by the Secure and Fair Enforcement for Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 (SAFE
Act), its implementing regulations (12 CFR §1007 and §1008), and any state SAFE Act law.
(1026.36(f)(2))
3. For individual loan originators who are its employees and who are not required to be licensed
and are not licensed as a loan originator under section 1008.103 or state SAFE Act
implementing law, determine whether the loan originator organization, prior to allowing the
individual to act as a loan originator:
a. Obtained a copy of the individual’s background check through the Nationwide Mortgage
Licensing System and Registry (NMLSR) or a criminal background check from a law
enforcement agency or commercial service; (1026.36(f)(3)(i)(A))
b. Obtained a credit report from a consumer reporting agency in compliance with FCRA
section 604(b); (1026.36(f)(3)(i)(B))
c. Obtained information from the NMLSR, or from the individual as applicable, about
administrative, civil, or criminal findings against the individual; (1026.36(f)(3)(i)(C))
d. Determined on the basis of obtained information or any other information reasonably
available that the individual has not been convicted of, plead guilty or nolo contendere to
a felony in a domestic or military court during the preceding seven year period;
(1026.36(f)(3)(ii)(A)(1))
15
For the purposes of §§1026.36(f) and (g), all creditors are loan originators.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 140
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
e. Determined on the basis of obtained information or any other information reasonably
available that the individual has not been convicted of, plead guilty or nolo contendere to
a felony involving an act of fraud, dishonesty, breach of trust, or money laundering, at
any time; (1026.36(f)(3)(ii)(A)(1))
f. Confirmed that if the individual has a felony conviction and is employed as an individual
loan originator, that the FDIC (or FRB, as applicable), NCUA, or Farm Credit
Administration has provided consent to employ the individual under their own statutory
authorities; (1026.36(f)(ii)(A)(2) (iii))
g. Confirmed that the individual demonstrated financial responsibility, character, and
general fitness such as to warrant a determination that the individual loan originator will
operate honestly, fairly, and efficiently; (1026(f)(3)(ii)(B))
h. Provides periodic training covering federal and state law requirements that apply to the
individual loan originator’s loan origination activities. (1026.36(f)(3)(iii))
NOTE: Paragraph (c) only applies to an individual loan originator hired on after January
1, 2014 (or an individual loan originator the loan originator organization hired before this
date but for whom there were no applicable statutory or regulatory background standards
in effect at the time of hire or used to screen the individual) or an individual loan
originator regardless of when hired who, based on reliable information known to the loan
originator organization, likely does not meet the qualification standards.
4. Verify that the loan originator organization and individual loan originator include their names
and NMLSR IDs on all required loan documentation, including: (1026.36(g))
a. The credit application;
b. The disclosures required by §1026.19(e) and (f);
c. The note or loan contract; and
d. The security instrument.
Policies and Procedures for Depository Institutions to
Ensure and Monitor Compliance
1. Verify that loan originator organizations that are depositories (including credit unions) have
established and maintain written policies and procedures reasonably designed (i.e.,
appropriate to the nature, size, complexity and scope of the mortgage lending activities of the
depository and its subsidiaries) to ensure that the depository, its subsidiaries and their
collective employees comply with the loan originator requirements of section 1026.36(d)–
(g). (1026.36(j))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 141
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Prohibition on Mandatory Arbitration Clauses and Waiver
of Certain Consumer Rights
1. Verify that the contract or other agreement for a consumer credit transaction secured by a
dwelling (including a home equity line of credit secured by the consumer’s principal
dwelling) does not include terms that require arbitration or any other non-judicial procedure
to resolve any controversy or settle any claims arising out of the transaction. (1026.36(h)(1))
2. Verify that the contract or other agreement relating to a consumer credit transaction secured
by a dwelling (including a home equity line of credit secured by the consumer’s principal
dwelling) has not been applied or interpreted to bar a consumer from bringing a claim in
court pursuant to any provision of law for damages or other relief in connection with any
alleged violation of any federal law. (1026.36(h)(2))
Prohibition on Financing Credit Insurance
1. Determine that the creditor does not finance, directly or indirectly, premiums or fees for
credit insurance (including credit life, credit disability, credit unemployment, or credit
property insurance, or any other accident, loss-of-income, life, or health insurance or direct
or indirect payment for debt cancellation/suspension) on the transaction secured by a
dwelling (including a home equity line of credit secured by a principal dwelling).
(1026.36(i))
NOTE: Credit unemployment insurance is not subject to this prohibition where the premiums
are reasonable, the creditor receives no direct or indirect compensation in connection with the
premiums, and the premiums are paid under a separate insurance contract and are not paid to
an affiliate of the creditor. Additionally, this prohibition does not apply to credit insurance
that is paid in full monthly.
Negative Amortization Counseling
1. Verify that the creditor received documentation that first-time borrowers received pre-loan
counseling from a HUD certified or approved counselor on each negative amortizing
mortgage loan to prior to originating the loan. (1026.36(k))
NOTE: This restriction does not apply to reverse mortgages covered under section 1026.33
or transactions secured by a timeshare plan. For more information, please see the
commentary to section 1026.36(k).
Servicing Requirements for Certain Home Mortgages
Subject to Subpart E
1. Determine whether the creditor, assignee, or servicer provides consumers with reasonably
prompt periodic statements for closed-end loans secured by a dwelling. (1026.41)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 142
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
NOTE: This requirement does not apply to reverse mortgages under section 1026.33;
timeshare plans; fixed-rate loans where the servicer currently provides consumers with
coupon books that contain account payment, fees, and contact information specified under
section 1026.41(e)(3); small servicers under section 1026.41(e)(4); or, as specified in section
1026.41(e)(5), for mortgages while the consumer is a debtor in bankruptcy under Title 11 of
the US Code. A small servicer is defined as (1) a servicer that, together with any affiliates,
services 5,000 or fewer loans, for all of which the servicer or any affiliate is the creditor or
assignee; (2) a servicer that is a housing finance agency under 24 CFR 226.5; or (3) a
nonprofit entity (defined in §1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C)(1)) that services 5,000 or fewer mortgage
loans, including any mortgage loans serviced on behalf of associated nonprofit entities
(defined in §1026.41(e)(4)(ii)(C)(2)), for all of which the servicer or an associated nonprofit
is the creditor. Small servicer status is generally based on the loans serviced by the servicer
and any affiliates as of January 1 for the remainder of the year. However, to determine small
servicer status under the nonprofit small servicer definition, a nonprofit servicer should be
evaluated based on the mortgage loans serviced by the servicer (and not those serviced by
associated nonprofit entities) as of January 1 for the remainder of the calendar year. Servicers
that cease to qualify as a small servicer will have the later of six months after the date they
ceased to qualify, or until the next January 1 to come into compliance.
NOTE ALSO: When examining a creditor or assignee that continues to own the loan, or a
servicer, if the entity states that another entity has the obligation to provide the disclosures,
examiners should determine whether the examined entity takes steps to ensure that the other
party (a creditor, assignee, or servicer) is complying with the obligation to provide the
disclosures.
2. Verify that the periodic statements contain:
a. The payment due date; the amount of any late payment fee, and the date on which that fee
will be imposed; and the amount due (the latter shown more prominently than other
disclosures on the page and, if the transaction has multiple payment options, the amount
due under each of the payment options), grouped together in close proximity to each
other and located at the top of the first page; (1026.41(d)(1))
b. The monthly payment amount, including a breakdown of how it will be applied to
principal, interest, and escrow, and if a mortgage loan has multiple payment options
along with information regarding how each payment will affect the principal, a
breakdown of each of the payment options; the total sum of any fees or charges imposed
since the last statement; and any payment amount past due, grouped together in close
proximity to each other and located at the top of the first page. (1026.41(d)(2))
c. The total of all payments received since the last statement, including a breakdown
showing how the payment was applied to principal, interests, escrow, fees, and charges,
and any amount sent to a suspense or unapplied funds account grouped together in close
proximity to each other and located at the top of the first page; (1026.41(d)(3)(i))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 143
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
d. The total of all payments received for the calendar year, including a breakdown of how
those payments were applied to principal, interest, escrow, fees. and charges and any
amount currently held in a suspense or unapplied funds account, grouped together in
close proximity to each other and located at the top of the first page; (1026.41(d)(3)(ii))
e. A list of transaction activity that occurred since the last statement, including the date,
amount, and brief description of the transaction. Transaction activity includes any activity
that caused a credit or debit to the amount currently due; (1026.41(d)(4))
f. For statements where a partial payment was received and the creditor or servicer held the
partial payment in a suspense or unapplied funds account, information explaining what
must be done for the funds to be applied to the balance, located on the front page or a
separate page of the statement or in a separate letter; (1026.41(d)(5))
g. A toll-free number, and if applicable, an email address, that consumers may use to obtain
account information located on the front page; (1026.41(d)(6))
h. The amount of the outstanding principal balance; (1026.41(d)(7)(i))
i. The current interest rate for the mortgage; (1026.41(d)(7)(ii))
j. The date that the interest may change (if applicable); (1026.41(d)(7)(iii))
k. Information regarding whether the loan contains a prepayment penalty;
(1026.41(d)(7)(iv))
l. The web address to the CFPB or HUD’s list of homeownership counselors or counseling
organizations and HUD’s toll-free telephone number to obtain contact information for
counselors or counseling organizations; (1026.41(d)(7)(v))
m. For consumers more than 45 days delinquent, creditors, assignees, or servicers also must
provide on the first page or on a separate page of the statement or in a separate letter:
i. The date that the consumer’s account became delinquent; (1026.41(d)(8)(i))
ii. A notification of the possible risks, such as foreclosure, and expenses that may occur
if the consumer does not become current; (1026.41(d)(8)(ii))
iii. An account history showing the shorter of the previous six months or from the time
the account was last current, the amount of payment that is past due from each billing
cycle; (1026.41(d)(8)(iii))
NOTE: If any payment was accepted as a full payment, the creditor or servicer must
show that the payment was credited to the consumer’s account and the date that the
payment was credited.
iv. A notice indicating any loss mitigation program that the consumer has agreed to;
(1026.41(d)(8)(iv))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 144
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
v. A notice of whether the servicer has initiated foreclosure proceedings;
(1026.41(d)(8)(v))
vi. The total payment amount needed to bring the account current; and
(1026.41(d)(8)(vi))
vii. A reference to homeownership counseling information required under section
1026.41(d)(7)(v). (1026.41(d)(8)(vii))
3. For high-cost mortgages, ensure the creditor or servicer does not charge any fee to modify,
renew, extend, or amend a high-cost mortgage, or to defer any payment due under the terms
of the mortgage. (1026.34(a)(7))
4. For high-cost mortgages, determine whether the creditor or servicer charged a late payment
greater than four percent of the payment past due. (1026.34(a)(8)(i))
5. For high-cost mortgages, determine that the creditor or servicer did not impose any late fee or
delinquency charge in connection with a payment, when the only delinquency was
attributable to late fees or delinquency charges assessed on an earlier payment, and the
payment is otherwise a full payment for the applicable period and is paid on its due date or
within any applicable grace period (§1026.34(a)(8)(iii)).
6. For high-cost mortgages, determine whether the creditor or servicer assessed any fees for
providing consumers with a payoff statement related to the high-cost mortgage.
(1026.34(a)(9))
NOTE: Creditors or servicers are permitted to assess a processing fee if the payoff statement
is provided by courier or by fax, the fee is comparable to fees for similar services provided
for non-high-cost mortgages, and the creditor or servicer discloses that payoff statements are
available by an alternative method free of charge. Additionally, within a calendar year, if the
creditor or servicer has already provided four payoff statements in compliance with section
1026.34(a)(9), it may assess fees for additional statements.
7. For high-cost mortgages, determine that the creditor or servicer is providing payoff
statements within five business days after receiving a request from the consumer (or
consumer’s authorized representative). (1026.34(a)(9)(v))
8. For higher-priced mortgage loans that are subject to the escrow account requirements, ensure
the creditor or servicer maintains the consumer’s escrow account for a minimum of five years
after consummation of the loan, unless: (1026.35(b)(3))
a. The creditor or servicer terminated the escrow account upon termination of the
underlying debt obligation (1026.35(b)(3)(i)(A)); or
b. The creditor or servicer terminated the escrow account upon request from the consumer,
no earlier than five years after consummation of the loan. (1026.35(b)(3)(i)(B))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 145
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
NOTE: Upon request from the consumer, the creditor or servicer must verify that the
unpaid principal balance of the higher-priced mortgage loan is less than 80 percent of the
original value of the property securing the loan and that the consumer is not delinquent or
in default on the loan, prior to cancelling the escrow account. (1026.35(b)(3)(ii))
9. For consumer credit transactions secured by a consumer’s principal dwelling, determine that
the creditor or servicer credited consumer’s periodic payments as of the date the payment
was received or ensured that any delay in crediting did not result in any charge to the
consumer or in the reporting of any negative information to a consumer reporting agency.
(§1026.34(a)(8)-(9) and 1026.36(c)(1)(i))
10. For consumer credit transactions secured by a consumer’s principal dwelling, determine
whether the creditor or servicer uses a suspense or unapplied payment account for partial
payments.
a. For creditors or servicers that use suspense or unapplied payment accounts for
consumers’ partial payments, verify that the creditor or servicer discloses to consumers
that amount held in the suspense account on the periodic statement required by section
1026.41(d)(3) if one is required (1026.36(c)(1)(ii)(A)); and
b. Verify that creditors or servicers credit a periodic payment to the consumer’s account
once the amount in the suspense account equals a periodic payment.
(1026.36(c)(1)(ii)(B))
11. For consumer credit transactions secured by a consumer’s principal dwelling, and for
creditors or servicers that accept non-conforming payments from consumers, verify that the
creditor or servicer credited the non-conforming payment to the consumer’s account as of
five days after receipt of the payment. (1026.36(c)(1)(iii))
12. Determine whether there were any of the following prohibited acts or practices in connection
with credit secured by a consumer’s principal dwelling (1026.36(c)):
a. Imposing on the consumer any late fee or delinquency charge in connection with a
payment, when the only delinquency was attributable to late fees or delinquency charges
assessed on an earlier payment, and the payment is otherwise a periodic payment for the
applicable period and is received on its due date or within any applicable courtesy period
(1026.36(c)(2)); or,
13. For consumer credit transactions secured by a dwelling (including a home equity line of credit
secured by a dwelling), verify that the creditor, assignee, or servicer provided, within a
reasonable time, but no later than seven business days after receiving a written request from the
consumer or person acting on behalf of the consumer, an accurate statement of the total
outstanding balance that would be required to pay the consumer’s obligation in full as of a
specific date except when a delay is because a loan is in bankruptcy or foreclosure, the loan is a
reverse or shared appreciation mortgage, or because of a natural disaster, in which case the
payoff statement must be provided within a reasonable period of time. (§1026.36(b) and (c)(3))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 146
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Valuation Independence
1. Determine that the covered person did not attempt to directly or indirectly cause the value
assigned to the consumer’s principal dwelling to be based on any factor other than the
independent judgment of a person that prepares valuations. Examples of such attempts
include (1026.42(c)):
a. Seeking to influence a person that prepares a valuation to report a minimum or maximum
value for the consumer’s principal dwelling;
b. Withholding or threatening to withhold timely payment to a person that prepares a
valuation or performs valuation management functions because the person does not value
the consumer’s principal dwelling at or above a certain amount;
c. Implying to a person that prepares valuations that current or future retention of the person
depends on the amount at which the person estimates the value of the consumer’s
principal dwelling;
d. Excluding a person that prepares a valuation from consideration for future engagement
because the person reports a value for the consumer’s principal dwelling that does not
meet or exceed a predetermined threshold; and
e. Conditioning the compensation paid to a person that prepares a valuation on
consummation of the covered transaction.
2. Determine that the valuation does not materially misrepresent the value of the consumer’s
principal dwelling. (1026.42(c)(2)(i))
NOTE: A misrepresentation is material if it is likely to significantly affect the value assigned
to the consumer’s principal dwelling. A bona fide error shall not be a misrepresentation.
3. Determine that a valuation was not falsified or materially altered. (1026.42(c)(2)(ii))
NOTE: An alteration is material if it is likely to significantly affect the value assigned to the
consumer’s principal dwelling.
4. Determine that the covered person does not induce a person to materially misrepresent or
falsify the value of a consumer’s principal dwelling (in violation of section 1026.42(c)(2)(i)
or (ii)). (1026.42(c)(2)(iii))
5. Prohibition on conflicts of interest. To the extent applicable, determine that the person who
prepared the valuations or performed the valuation management functions for a covered
transaction did not have a direct or indirect interest, financial or otherwise, in the property or
transaction for which the valuation is or will be performed. (1026.42(d)(1)(i))
NOTE: No person violates this section solely because that the person is an employee or
affiliate of the creditor, or provides a settlement service in addition to preparing valuations or
CFPB April 2015 TILA 147
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
performing valuation management functions, or based solely on the fact that the person’s
affiliate performs another settlement service, as long as the conditions discussed below ((f),
(g), and (h)) are met. If they are not met, whether the conflicts of interest provisions are
violated by the above persons or entities depends on all of the facts and circumstances. In
other words, the conditions in (f), (g), and (h) are a safe harbor, but not required.
6. For any consumer credit transaction secured by the consumer’s principal dwelling in which
the creditor had assets of more than $250 million as of December 31st for both of the past
two calendar years, determine that a person subject to section 1026.42(d)(1)(i) who is
employed by or affiliated with the creditor does not have a conflict of interest in violation of
section 1026.42(d)(1)(i) based solely on the person’s employment or affiliate relationship
with the creditor if (1026.42(d)(2)):
a. The compensation of the person preparing a valuation or performing valuation
management functions is not based on the value arrived at in any valuation;
b. The person preparing a valuation or performing valuation management functions reports
to a person who is not part of the creditor’s loan production function, as defined in
section 1026.42(d)(5)(i), and whose compensation is not based on the closing of the
transaction to which the valuation relates; and
c. No employee, officer or director in the creditor’s loan production function, as defined in
section 1026.42(d)(5)(i), is directly or indirectly involved in selecting, retaining,
recommending or influencing the selection of the person to prepare a valuation or
perform valuation management functions, or to be included in or excluded from a list of
approved persons who prepare valuations or perform valuation management functions.
7. For any covered transaction in which the creditor had assets of $250 million or less as of
December 31st for either of the past two calendar years, determine that a person subject to
section 1026.42(d)(1)(i) who is employed by or affiliated with the creditor does not have a
conflict of interest in violation of section 1026.42(d)(1)(i) based solely on the person’s
employment or affiliate relationship with the creditor if (1026.42(d)(3)):
a. The compensation of the person preparing a valuation or performing valuation
management functions is not based the value arrived at in any valuation; and
b. The creditor requires that any employee, officer or director of the creditor who orders,
performs, or reviews a valuation for a covered transaction abstain from participating in
any decision to approve, not approve, or set the terms of that transaction.
8. For any covered transaction, determine that a person who prepares a valuation or performs
valuation management functions in addition to performing another settlement service for the
transaction, or whose affiliate performs another settlement service for the transaction, does
not have a conflict of interest in violation of section 1026.42(d)(1)(i) as a result of the person
or the person’s affiliate performing another settlement service for the transaction if
(1026.42(d)(4)):
CFPB April 2015 TILA 148
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
a. The creditor had assets of more than $250 million as of December 31st for both of the
past two calendar years and the conditions in paragraph (d)(2)(i)-(iii) are met; or
b. The creditor had assets of $250 million or less as of December 31st for either of the past
two calendar years and the conditions in paragraph (d)(3)(i)-(ii) are met.
9. If the creditor did know at or before consummation of a violation of sections 1026.42(c) or
(d) in connection with a valuation, determine that the creditor did not extend credit based on
the valuation, unless the creditor documented that it acted with reasonable diligence to
determine that the valuation did not materially misstate or misrepresent the value of the
consumer’s principal dwelling. (1026.42(e))
NOTE: For purposes of section 1026.42(e), a valuation materially misstates or misrepresents
the value of the consumer’s principal dwelling if the valuation contains a misstatement or
misrepresentation that affects the credit decision or the terms on which credit is extended.
10. Customary and reasonable compensation. For any covered transaction, determine that the
creditor and its agents compensated a fee appraiser for performing appraisal services at a rate
that is customary and reasonable for comparable appraisal services performed in the
geographic market of the property being appraised. (1026.42(f)(1))
NOTE: For purposes of section 1026.42(f), “agents” of the creditor do not include any fee
appraiser as defined in section 1026.42(f)(4)(i). An “agent” could be an appraisal
management company to which the creditor has outsourced the valuation function.
11. If the creditor reasonably believes an appraiser has not complied with the Uniform Standards
of Professional Appraisal Practice or ethical or professional requirements for appraisers
under applicable state or federal statutes or regulations, determine that the creditor referred
the matter within a reasonable period of time to the appropriate state agency if the failure to
comply is material. (1026.42(g)(1))
NOTE: For purposes of section 1026.42(g), a failure to comply is material if it is likely to
significantly affect the value assigned to the consumer’s principal dwelling.
Open-End Credit Transactional Testing Procedures
1. For each open-end credit product tested, determine the accuracy of the disclosures by
comparing the disclosure with the contract and other financial institution documents.
(1026.5(c))
2. Review the financial institution’s policies, procedures, and practices to determine whether it
provides appropriate disclosures for creditor-initiated direct mail applications and
solicitations to open charge card accounts, telephone applications and solicitations to open
charge card accounts, and applications and solicitations made available to the general public
to open charge card accounts. (1026.60(b), (c), and (d))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 149
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
3. Determine for all home equity plans with a variable rate that the APR is based on an
independent index. Further, ensure home equity plans are terminated or terms changed only
if certain conditions exist. (1026.40(f))
4. Determine that, if any consumer rejected a home equity plan because a disclosed term
changed before the plan was opened, all fees were refunded. Verify that non-refundable fees
were not imposed until three business days after the consumer received the required
disclosures and brochure. (1026.40(g) and (h))
5. Review consecutive periodic billing statements for each major type of open-end credit
activity offered (overdraft and home-equity lines of credit, credit card programs, etc.).
Determine whether disclosures were calculated accurately and are consistent with the initial
disclosure statement furnished in connection with the accounts (or any subsequent change in
terms notice) and the underlying contractual terms governing the plan(s).
6. Determine whether the consumer was given notice of the right to reject the significant
change, with the exception of:
a. An increase in the required minimum periodic payment (1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(B)),
b. A change in the APR (1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(B)),
c. A change in the balance computation method necessary to comply with section 1026.54,
which sets forth certain limitations on the imposition of finance charges as a result of a
loss of a grace period, or
d. Increase in fee pursuant to evaluation under section 1026.52 or adjustment to safe harbors
e. Increase in fees previously reduced under SCRA
f. When the change results from the creditor not receiving the required minimum periodic
payment within 60 days after the due date for that payment. (1026.9(c)(2)(iv)(B))
7. Determine that the creditor did not increase the rate applicable to the consumer’s account to
the penalty rate if the outstanding balance did not exceed the credit limit on the date set forth
in the notice. (1026.9(g)(4))
8. Determine, for each type of open-end rescindable loan being tested, the appropriate number
of copies of the rescission notice are provided to each person whose ownership interest is or
will be subject to the security interest and perform the procedures 12, 13, and 14 under
Closed-End Credit section. (1026.15(b), (c) and (e))
9. Additional variable rate testing: Verify that when accounts were opened or loans were
consummated that loan contract terms were recorded correctly in the financial institution’s
calculation systems (e.g., its computer). Determine the accuracy of the following recorded
information:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 150
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
a. Index value,
b. Margin and method of calculating rate changes,
c. Rounding method, and
d. Adjustment caps (periodic and lifetime).
10. Using a sample of periodic disclosures for open-end variable rate accounts (e.g., home equity
accounts) and closed-end rate change notices for adjustable rate mortgage loans:
a. Compare the rate-change date and rate on the credit obligation to the actual rate-change
date and rate imposed.
b. Determine that the index disclosed and imposed is based on the terms of the contract
(example: the weekly average of one-year Treasury constant maturities, taken as of 45
days before the change date). (§1026.7(a) and 1026.20(c)(2))
c. Determine that the new interest rate is correctly disclosed by adding the correct index
value with the margin stated in the note, plus or minus any contractual fractional
adjustment. (§1026.7(g) and 1026.20 (c)(1))
d. Determine that the new payment disclosed (1026.20(c)(4)) was based on an interest rate
and loan balance in effect at least 25 days before the payment change date (consistent
with the contract). (1026.20(c))
Crediting a Consumer’s Account – Section 1026.10
1. Ensure that the creditor credits payment to a consumer’s account as of the date of receipt,
except when a delay in crediting does not result in a finance charge or other charge.
(1026.10(a))
2. If a creditor specifies requirements for payments, determine that they are reasonable and
enable most consumers to make conforming payments. (1026.10(b))
3. Except as provided by section 1026.10(b)(4)(ii), if a creditor specifies, on or with the
periodic statement, requirements for the consumer to follow in making payments as
permitted under section 1026.10, but accepts a payment that does not conform to the
requirements, determine that the payment is credited within five days of receipt.
(1026.10(b)(4)(i))
4. If the creditor promotes a method for making payments, determine that the creditor considers
such payments conforming payments in accordance with section 1026.10(b) and that they are
credited to the consumer’s account as of the date of receipt, except when a delay in crediting
does not result in a finance charge or other charge. (1026.10(b)(4)(ii))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 151
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
5. If the creditor sets a cut-off time for payments to be received by mail, by electronic means,
by telephone, or in person, verify that the cut-off time is 5 p.m. or later on the payment due
date at the location specified by the creditor for the receipt of such payments.
(1026.10(b)(2)(ii))
6. For in-person payments on a credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured)
consumer credit plan at a financial institution branch or office that accepts such payments, a
card issuer shall not impose a cut-off time earlier than the close of business for any such
payments made in person at any branch or office of the card issuer at which such payments
are accepted. However, a card issuer may impose a cut-off time earlier than 5 p.m. for such
payments, if the close of business of the branch or office is earlier than 5 p.m.
(1026.10(b)(3)(i))
7. If a creditor fails to credit a payment as required and imposes a finance or other charge,
ensure that the creditor credits the charge(s) to the consumer’s account during the next billing
cycle. (1026.10(c))
8. If (due to a weekend or holiday, for example) a creditor does not receive or accept payments
by mail on the due date for payments, determine that the creditor treats as timely a payment
received on the next business day. (1026.10(d)(1))
NOTE: If a creditor accepts or receives payments made on the due date by a method other
than mail, such as electronic or telephone payments, the creditor is not required to treat a
payment made by that method on the next business day as timely.
9. For credit card accounts under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan,
determine that the creditor does not impose a separate fee to allow consumers to make a
payment by any method, such as mail, electronic, or telephone payments, unless such
payment method involves an expedited service by a customer service representative of the
creditor. (1026.10(e))
NOTE: For purposes of section 1026.10(e), the term “creditor” includes a third party that
collects, receives, or processes payments on behalf of a creditor.
10. If a card issuer makes a material change in the address for receiving payments or procedures
for handling payments, and such change causes a material delay in the crediting of a payment
to a consumer’s account during the 60-day period following the date on which such change
took effect, ensure that the card issuer does not impose any late fee or finance charge for a
late payment on the credit card account during the 60-day period following the date on which
the change took effect. (1026.10(f))
Treatment of Credit Balances, Account Termination
– Section 1026.11
1. Determine institution’s treatment of credit balances. Specifically, if the account’s credit
balance is in excess of $1, the institution must take the actions listed below. (1026.11)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 152
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
a. Credit the amount to the consumer’s account; and
b. Either:
i. Refund any part of the remaining credit balance within seven business days from
receiving a written request from the consumer; or
ii. If no written request is received and the credit remains for more than six months,
make a good faith effort to refund the amount of the credit to the consumer by cash,
check, money order, or credit to a deposit account of the consumer. No further action
is required if the consumer’s current location is not known to the creditor and cannot
be traced through the consumer’s last known address or telephone number.
2. Determine that institution has not terminated an account prior to its expiration date solely
because the consumer did not incur a finance charge. However, a creditor is not prohibited
from closing an account that, for three consecutive months, no credit has been extended (such
as by purchase, cash advance, or balance transfer) and the account has had no outstanding
balance. (1026.11(b))
3. Determine that, for credit card accounts under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer
credit plan, the card issuer has adopted reasonable written policies and procedures designed
to ensure that an administrator of an estate of a deceased account holder can determine the
amount of and pay any balance on the account in a timely manner. (1026.11(c)(1)(i))
NOTE: This does not apply to the account of a deceased consumer if a joint account holder
remains on the account.
4. Ensure that, upon request by the administrator of an estate, the card issuer provides the
administrator with the amount of the balance on a deceased consumer’s account in a timely
manner. (1026.11(c)(2)(i))
NOTE: Providing the amount of the balance on the account within 30 days of receiving the
request is deemed to be timely.
5. Verify that, after receiving a request from the administrator of an estate for the amount of the
balance on a deceased consumer’s account, the card issuer does not impose any fees on the
account (such as a late fee, annual fee, or over the-limit fee) or increase any annual
percentage rate, except as provided by section 1026.55(b)(2) (i.e., due to the operation of an
index). (1026.11(c)(3)(i))
6. Determine that, if payment in full of the disclosed balance, pursuant to section 1026.11(c)(2),
is received within 30 days after disclosure, the card issuer waives or rebates any additional
finance charge due to a periodic interest rate. (1026.11(c)(3)(ii))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 153
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Special Credit Card Provisions and Billing Error Resolution
– Sections 1026.12 and 13
1. Review a sample of billing error resolution files and a sample of consumers who have
asserted a claim or defense against the financial institution for a credit card dispute regarding
property or services. Verify the following (§1026.12 and 1026.13):
a. Credit cards are issued only upon request;
b. Liability for unauthorized credit card use is limited to $50;
c. Disputed amounts are not reported delinquent unless remaining unpaid after the dispute
has been settled;
d. Offsetting credit card indebtedness is prohibited; and
e. Errors are resolved within two complete billing cycles.
Ability to Make the Required Minimum Payments
– Section 1026.51
1. Determine that the card issuer does not open a credit card account for a consumer under an
open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan, or increase any credit limit applicable to
such account, unless the card issuer considers the ability of the consumer to make the
required minimum periodic payments under the terms of the account based on the
consumer’s income or assets and current obligations. (1026.51(a)(1)(i))
2. Verify that the card issuer establishes and maintains reasonable written policies and
procedures to consider a consumer’s income or assets and current obligations. Reasonable
policies and procedures to consider a consumer’s ability to make the required payments
include a consideration of at least one of the following: (1026.51(a)(1)(ii))
a. The ratio of debt obligations to income;
b. The ratio of debt obligations to assets; or
c. The income the consumer will have after paying debt obligations.
NOTE: Reasonable written policies and procedures may include treating any income and
assets to which the consumer has a reasonable expectation of access as the consumer’s
income or assets, or may be limited to consideration to the consumer’s independent income
and assets.
3. Confirm that the card issuer does not issue a credit card to a consumer who does not have any
income or assets, and that the credit does not issue a credit card without reviewing any
information about a consumer’s income, assets, or current obligations. (1026.51(a)(1)(ii))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 154
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
NOTE: A card issuer may consider the consumer’s income or assets based on information
provided by the consumer, in connection with the credit card account or any other financial
relationship the card issuer or its affiliates has with the consumer, subject to any applicable
information-sharing rules, and information obtained through third parties, subject to any
applicable information-sharing rules. A card issuer may also consider information obtained
through any empirically derived, demonstrably and statistically sound model that reasonably
estimates a consumer’s income or assets. (Comment 1026.51(a)-5)
4. Determine that the card issuer uses a reasonable method for estimating the minimum periodic
payments the consumer would be required to pay under the terms of the account.
(1026.51(a)(2)(i))
5. A card issuer’s estimate of the minimum periodic payment is compliant (i.e., receives the
benefit of a safe harbor) if it uses the following method (1026.51(a)(2)(ii)):
a. The card issuer assumes utilization, from the first day of the billing cycle, of the full
credit line that the issuer is considering offering to the consumer; and
b. The card issuer uses a minimum payment formula employed by the issuer for the product
the issuer is considering offering to the consumer or, in the case of an existing account,
the minimum payment formula that currently applies to that account, provided that:
i. If the applicable minimum payment formula includes interest charges, the card issuer
estimates those charges using an interest rate that the issuer is considering offering to
the consumer for purchases or, in the case of an existing account, the interest rate that
currently applies to purchases; and
ii. If the applicable minimum payment formula includes mandatory fees, the card issuer
must assume that such fees have been charged to the account.
6. Rules affecting young consumers: If the card issuer opens a credit card account under an
open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan for a consumer less than 21 years old,
verify that the issuer requires that such consumers:
a. Submit a written application; and
b. Either possess an independent ability to make the required minimum periodic payments
on the proposed extension of credit in connection with the account under section
1026.51(b)(1)(i)) or provide a signed agreement of a cosigner, guarantor, or joint
applicant who is at least 21 years old who has the ability to make the required minimum
periodic payments on such debts, and be either jointly liable with the consumer for any
debt on the account, or secondarily liable for any debt on the account incurred by the
consumer before the consumer has attained the age of 21 pursuant to section
1026.51(b)(1)(ii)(A) and (B).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 155
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
7. If a credit card account was opened for such consumer without a cosigner, guarantor, or joint
applicant pursuant to section 1026.51(b)(1), determine that the issuer does not increase the
credit limit on the account before the consumer turns 21 unless:
a. At the time of the contemplated increase, the consumer has an independent ability to
make the required minimum periodic payments; or
b. A cosigner, guarantor, or joint accountholder who is at least 21 years old and has the
ability to make the required minimum periodic payments agrees in writing to assume
liability for any debt incurred on the account. (1026.51(b)(2)(i))
8. If a credit card account was opened for such a consumer with a cosigner, guarantor, or joint
applicant pursuant to section 1026.51(b)(1)(ii), determine that the issuer does not increase the
credit limit on such account before the consumer attains the age of 21 unless the cosigner,
guarantor, or joint accountholder who assumed liability at account opening agrees in writing
to assume liability on the increase. (1026.51(b)(2))
Limitations on Fees – Section 1026.52
1. During the first year after the opening of a credit card account under an open-end (not home-
secured) consumer credit plan, determine whether the card issuer required the consumer to
pay covered fees in excess of the 25 percent of the credit limit in effect when the account is
opened. (1026.52(a)(1))
NOTE: The 25 percent limitation on fees does not apply to fees assessed prior to opening the
account.
NOTE ALSO: An account is considered opened no earlier than the date on which the account
may first be used by the consumer to engage in transactions.
Covered fees include fees (Comment 1026.52(a)(2)-1):
a. For the issuance or availability of credit, including any fees based on account activity or
inactivity;
b. For insurance, debt cancellation or debt suspension coverage, if the insurance or debt
cancellation or suspension coverage is required by the terms of the account;
c. The consumer is required to pay to engage in transactions using the account, such as:
i. Cash advance fees;
ii. Balance transfer fees;
iii. Foreign transaction fees; and
iv. Fees for using the account for purchases.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 156
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
d. Fees the consumer is required to pay for violating the terms of the account, except to the
extent they are specifically excluded (see below);
e. Fixed finance charges; and
f. Minimum charges imposed if a charge would otherwise have been determined by
applying a periodic interest rate to a balance except for the fact that such charge is
smaller than the minimum.
NOTE: Section 1026.52(a) does not authorize the imposition or payment of fees or charges
otherwise prohibited by law. (1026.52(a)(3)
2. Fees not covered by this limitation include: (1026.52(a)(2)(i)
a. Late payment fees, over-the-limit fees, and returned-payment fees; or
b. Fees that the consumer is not required to pay with respect to the account, such as:
i. An expedited payment fee;
ii. Fees for optional services like travel insurance;
iii. Fees for reissuing a lost or stolen card; or
iv. Statement reproduction fees.
3. Review penetration rates of various optional services to determine if they are truly optional
and therefore not covered by the 25 percent limitation.
4. Ensure that the card issuer does not impose a fee for violating the terms or other requirements
of a credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan unless
the dollar amount of the fee is consistent with sections 1026.52(b)(1) and (b)(2). (1026.52(b))
5. Determine that a card issuer imposes a fee for violating the terms or other requirements of a
credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan only if the
dollar amount of the fee is consistent with either section 1026.52(b)(1)(i) or section
1026.52(b)(1)(ii). (1026.52(b)(1))
6. Cost determination. A card issuer may impose a fee for a particular violation (e.g., late
payment) if the card issuer has determined that the fee represents a reasonable proportion of
the total costs incurred by the issuer as a result of that type of violation. If a card issuer is
relying on a cost determination instead of the safe harbors (see below), review
(1026.52(b)(1)(i)):
a. The number of violations of a particular type experienced by the card issuer during a
prior period of reasonable length (e.g., a 12-month period).
CFPB April 2015 TILA 157
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
b. The costs incurred by the card issuer during that period as a result of those violations.
Losses and associated costs (including the cost of holding reserves against potential
losses and the cost of funding delinquent accounts) must be excluded from this analysis.
c. If used by the card issuer when making its determination:
i. The number of fees imposed by the card issuer as a result of the type of violation
during the period that the issuer reasonably estimates it will be unable to collect.
ii. Reasonable estimates for an upcoming period of changes in the number of violations
of the relevant type, the resulting costs, and the number of fees that the card issuer
will be unable to collect.
d. If applicable, whether the items in paragraph 1-3 have been reevaluated by the card issuer
at least once during the prior 12 months. If as a result of the reevaluation the card issuer
determines that a lower fee represents a reasonable proportion of the total costs incurred
by the card issuer as a result of that type of violation, determine that the card issuer
begins imposing the lower fee within 45 days after completing the reevaluation.
NOTE: If as a result of the reevaluation the card issuer determines that a higher fee
represents a reasonable proportion of the total costs incurred by the card issuer as a result
of that type of violation, the card issuer may begin imposing the higher fee after
complying with the notice requirements in section 1026.9. (1026.52(b)(1)(i))
7. Safe harbors. A card issuer may impose a fee for violating the terms or other requirements of
the account if the dollar amount of the fee does not exceed, as applicable
(§1026.52(b)(1)(ii)(A)-(C)):
a. $25.00,
b. $35.00 if the card issuer previously imposed a fee pursuant to section
1026.52(b)(1)(ii)(A) for a violation of the same type that occurred during the same billing
cycle or one of the next six billing cycles or
c. Three percent of the delinquent balance on a charge card account that requires payment
of outstanding balances in full at the end of each billing cycle if the card issuer has not
received the required payment for two or more consecutive billing cycles.
NOTE: The dollar amounts in paragraphs 1 and 2 above will be adjusted annually by the
CFPB to the extent that changes in the Consumer Price Index warrant an increase or
decrease of a whole dollar.
8. Determine that the card issuer does not impose a fee for violating the terms or other
requirements of a credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit
plan that exceeds the dollar amount associated with the violation. (1026.52(b)(2)(i)(A))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 158
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
9. Determine that a card issuer does not impose a fee for violating the terms or other
requirements of a credit card account under an open end (not home-secured) consumer credit
plan when there is no dollar amount associated with the violation. For purposes of section
1026.52(b)(2)(i), there is no dollar amount associated with the following violations
(1026.52(b)(2)(i)(B)):
a. Transactions that the card issuer declines to authorize;
b. Account inactivity; and
c. The closure or termination of an account.
10. Determine that the card issuer does not impose more than one fee for violating the terms or
other requirements of a credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer
credit plan based on a single event or transaction. (1026.52(b)(2)(ii))
Allocation of Payments – Section 1026.53
1. Determine whether, when a consumer makes a payment in excess of the required minimum
periodic payment, the card issuer allocates the excess amount:
a. First to the balance with the highest APR, and
b. Any remaining portion to the other balances in descending order based on the
applicable APR.
2. For balances on a credit card account subject to a deferred interest or similar program,
determine whether the card issuer allocated any amount paid by the consumer in excess of
the required minimum periodic payment:
a. Consistent with the general requirement discussed in (a) above, except that, during the
two billing cycles immediately preceding expiration of the deferred interest period, the
excess amount must have been allocated first to the balance subject to the deferred
interest or similar program and any remaining portion allocated to any other balances
consistent with section 1026.53(a) (1026.53(b)(1)(i)), or
b. In the manner requested by the consumer (1026.53(b)(1)(ii)).
3. When a balance on a credit card account is secured, the card issuer may at its option allocate
any amount paid by the consumer in excess of the required minimum periodic payment to
that balance if requested by the consumer. (1026.53(b)(2))
Loss of a Grace Period – Section 1026.54
1. Determine whether the card issuer imposed finance charges as a result of the loss of a grace
period on a credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan
based on:
CFPB April 2015 TILA 159
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
a. Balances for days in billing cycles that precede the most recent billing cycle, a prohibited
practice; or
b. Any portion of a balance subject to a grace period that was repaid prior to the expiration
of the grace period. (1026.54).
2. With respect to the prohibition in a.2 above, issuers are not required to follow any specific
methodology, but an issuer is in compliance if it applies the consumer’s payment to the
balance subject to the grace period and calculates interest charges on the amount of the
balance that remains unpaid. (Comment 1026.54(a)(1)-5)
Exceptions: This rule does not apply to adjustments to the finance charge as a result of:
a. The resolution of a dispute under section 1026.12, unauthorized use, or section 1026.13,
billing error; or
b. The return of a payment.
Limitations on Increasing Annual Percentage Rates, Fees,
and Charges – Section 1026.55
1. a. With respect to a credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer
credit plan, determine that the card issuer did not increase an APR or fee or charge required
to be disclosed under sections 1026.6(b)(2)(ii) (fee for issuance or availability (e.g., an
annual fee)), (b)(2)(iii) (fixed finance charge or minimum interest charge), or (b)(2)(xii) (fee
for required insurance, debt cancellation, or debt suspension coverage), unless as permitted
by one of the six exceptions:
a. Temporary rate, fee, or charge exception;
b. Variable rate exception;
c. Advance notice exception;
d. Delinquency exception;
e. Workout and temporary hardship arrangement; and
f. Servicemembers Civil Relief Act exception (1026.55(a)-(b)).
2. To assess whether the temporary rate, fee, or charge exception applies (1026.55(b)(1)),
determine whether:
a. The card issuer increased the APR, fee, or charge upon the expiration of a specified
period of six months or longer and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 160
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
b. Prior to the commencement of that period, the card issuer disclosed in writing to the
consumer, in a clear and conspicuous manner, the length of the period and the APR, fee,
or charge that would apply after expiration of the period.
3. If the temporary rate exception applies, determine that the card issuer:
a. Did not apply an APR, fee, or charge to transactions that occurred prior to the period that
exceeds the APR, fee, or charge that applied to those transactions prior to the period;
b. Provided the required notice, but did not apply an APR, fee, or charge (to transactions
that occurred within 14 days after provision of the notice) that exceeds the APR, fee, or
charge that applied to that category of transactions prior to provision of the notice; and
c. Did not apply an annual percentage rate to transactions that occurred during the period
that exceeds the increased APR, fee, or charge.
4. If the variable rate exception applies (1026.55(b)(2)), determine that the card issuer did not
increase an APR unless:
a. The increase in the APR is due to an increase in the index; and
b. The annual percentage rate varies according to an index that is not under the card issuer’s
control and is available to the general public.
NOTE: For purposes of qualifying under this exception, an index is considered under the
card issuer’s control if the card issuer applies a minimum rate or floor below which the rate
cannot decrease. However, because there is no disadvantage to consumers, issuers are not
prevented from setting a maximum rate or ceiling. (Comment 1026.55(b)(2) – 2(ii))
5. If the advance notice exception applies (1026.55(b)(3)), determine that the card issuer:
a. Did not apply that increased APR, fee, or charge to transactions that occurred prior to
provision of the notice;
b. Did not apply the increased APR, fee, or charge to transactions that occurred prior to or
within 14 days after provision of the notice; and
c. Did not increase the APR, fee, or charge during the first year after the account is opened.
6. If the delinquency exception applies (1026.55(b)(4)), determine that the card issuer:
a. Disclosed in a clear and conspicuous manner in the required notice a statement of the
reason for the increase, and
b. Will cease the increase if the card issuer receives six consecutive required minimum
periodic payments on or before the payment due date, beginning with the first payment
due following the effective date of the increase.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 161
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
7. If the delinquency exception applies and the card issuer received six consecutive required
minimum periodic payments on or before the payment due date beginning with the first
payment due following the effective date of the increase, determine that the card issuer
reduces any APR, fee, or charge (increased pursuant to the delinquency exception) to the
original APR, fee, or charge that applied prior to the increase with respect to transactions that
occurred prior to or within 14 days after provision of the required notice.
8. If the workout and temporary hardship arrangement exception applies (1026.55(b)(5)),
determine that:
a. Prior to commencement of the arrangement (except as provided in section
1026.9(c)(2)(v)(D)) the card issuer provided the consumer with a clear and conspicuous
written disclosure of the terms of the arrangement (including any increases due to the
completion or failure of the arrangement); and
b. Upon the completion or failure of the arrangement, the card issuer did not apply to any
transactions that occurred prior to commencement of the arrangement an APR, fee, or
charge that exceeds the APR, fee, or charge that applied to those transactions prior to
commencement of the arrangement.
9. If the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act exception applies (1026.55(b)(6)), determine that the
card issuer increased the APR, fee, or charge only after 50 U.S.C. app. 527 or a similar
federal or state statute or regulation no longer applied. Further, determine that the issuer did
not apply to any transactions that occurred prior to the decrease an APR, fee, or charge that
exceeded the APR, fee, or charge that applied to those transactions prior to the decrease.
10. For protected balances (1026.55(c)), determine that the card issuer did not require repayment
using a method that is less beneficial to the consumer than one of the following methods:
a. The method of repayment for the account before the effective date of the increase;
b. An amortization period of not less than five years, beginning no earlier than the effective
date of the increase; or
c. A required minimum periodic payment that includes a percentage of the balance that is
equal to no more than twice the percentage required before the effective date of the
increase.
11. If a card issuer promotes the waiver or rebate of finance charges due to a periodic interest
rate or fees or charges (§1026.6(b)(2)(ii), (b)(2)(iii), or (b)(2)(xii)) and applies the waiver or
rebate to a credit card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan,
any cessation of the waiver or rebate on that account constitutes an increase in an annual
percentage rate, fee, or charge for purposes of section 1026.55.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 162
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Requirements for Over-the-Limit Transactions
– Section 1026.56
1. Joint Relationships. Determine that, if two or more consumers are jointly liable on a credit
card account under an open-end (not home-secured) consumer credit plan, the card issuer
treats the affirmative consent of any of the joint consumers as affirmative consent for that
account. Similarly, determine that the card issuer treats a revocation of consent by any of the
joint consumers as revocation of consent for that account. (1026.56(f))
2. Notwithstanding a consumer’s affirmative consent to a card issuer’s payment of over-the-
limit transactions, determine that the card issuer does not (1026.56(j)):
a. Impose more than one over-the-limit fee or charge on a consumer’s credit card account
per billing cycle, and, in any event, only if the credit limit was exceeded during the
billing cycle. In addition, the card issuer may not impose an over-the-limit fee or charge
on the consumer’s credit card account for more than three billing cycles for the same
over-the-limit transaction where the consumer has not reduced the account balance below
the credit limit by the payment due date for either of the last two billing cycles.
NOTE: There is an exception to the latter prohibition if another over-the-limit transaction
occurred in the last two billing cycles.
b. Impose an over-the-limit fee or charge solely because of the card issuer’s failure to
promptly replenish the consumer’s available credit following the crediting of the
consumer’s payment following the crediting of the consumer’s payment under section
1026.10.
c. Condition the amount of a consumer’s credit limit on the consumer affirmatively
consenting to the card issuer’s payment of over-the-limit transactions if the card issuer
assesses a fee or charge for such service.
d. Impose an over-the-limit fee or charge for a billing cycle if a consumer exceeds a credit
limit solely because of fees or interest charged by the card issuer (defined as charges
imposed as part of the plan under section 1026.6(b)(3)) to the consumer’s account during
that billing cycle.
Reevaluation of Rate Increases – Section 1026.59
1. If a card issuer increases an APR that applies to a credit card account under an open-end (not
home-secured) consumer credit plan, based on the credit risk of the consumer, market
conditions, or other factors, or increased such a rate on or after January 1, 2009, and 45 days’
advance notice of the rate increase is required pursuant to section 1026.9(c)(2) or (g),
determine that the card issuer (1026.59(a)(1)):
a. Evaluates the factors described in section 1026.59(d); and
CFPB April 2015 TILA 163
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
b. Based on its review of such factors, reduces the APR applicable to the consumer’s
account, as appropriate.
2. If a card issuer is required to reduce the rate applicable to an account pursuant to section
1026.59(a)(1), determine that the card issuer reduces the rate not later than 45 days after
completion of the evaluation described in section 1026.59(a)(1). (1026.59(a)(2)(i))
NOTE: Any reduction in an APR required pursuant to section 1026.59(a)(1) of this section
shall apply to (1026.59(a)(2)(ii)):
a. Any outstanding balances to which the increased rate described in section 1026.59(a)(1)
has been applied; and
b. New transactions that occur after the effective date of the rate reduction that would
otherwise have been subject to the increased rate.
3. Determine that the card issuer has reasonable written policies and procedures in place to
conduct the review described in section 1026.59(a). (1026.59(b))
4. Determine that a card issuer that is subject to section 1026.59(a) conducts the review
described in section 1026.59(a)(1) not less frequently than once every six months after the
rate increase. (1026.59(c))
5. Except as provided in section 1026.59(d)(2), determine that the card issuer reviews either
(1026.59(d)(1)):
a. The factors on which the increase in an APR was originally based; or
b. The factors that the card issuer currently considers when determining the APRs
applicable to similar new credit card accounts under an open-end (not home-secured)
consumer credit plan.
6. For rate increases imposed between January 1, 2009 and February 21, 2010, determine that
an issuer considered the factors described in section 1026.59(d)(1)(ii) when conducting the
first two reviews required under section 1026.59(a), unless the rate increase subject to section
1026.59(a) was based solely upon factors specific to the consumer, such as a decline in the
consumer’s credit risk, the consumer’s delinquency or default, or a violation of the terms of
the account. (1026.59(d)(2))
7. If an issuer increases a rate applicable to a consumer’s account pursuant to section
1026.55(b)(4) based on the card issuer not receiving the consumer’s required minimum
periodic payment within 60 days after the due date, note that the issuer is not required to
perform the review described in section 1026.59(a) prior to the sixth payment due date after
the effective date of the increase. However, if the APR applicable to the consumer’s account
is not reduced pursuant to section 1026.55(b)(4)(ii), determine that the card issuer performs
the review described in section 1026.59(a). Determine that the first such review occurs no
CFPB April 2015 TILA 164
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
later than six months after the sixth payment due following the effective date of the rate
increase. (1026.59(e))
8. The obligation to review factors described in sections 1026.59(a) and (d) ceases to apply
(1026.59(f)):
a. If the issuer reduces the APR applicable to a credit card account under an open-end (not
home-secured) consumer credit plan to the rate applicable immediately prior to the
increase, or, if the rate applicable immediately prior to the increase was a variable rate, to
a variable rate determined by the same formula (index and margin) that was used to
calculate the rate applicable immediately prior to the increase; or
b. If the issuer reduces the APR to a rate that is lower than the rate described in section
1026.59(f)(1) of this section.
9. Except as provided in section 1026.59(g)(2), section 1026.59 applies to credit card accounts
that have been acquired by the card issuer from another card issuer. (1026.59(g))
10. Determine that a card issuer that complies with this section by reviewing the factors
described in section 1026.59(d)(1)(i) reviews the factors considered by the card issuer from
which it acquired the accounts in connection with the rate increase. (1026.59(g)(1))
11. If, not later than six months after the acquisition of such accounts, a card issuer reviews all of
the credit card accounts it acquires in accordance with the factors that it currently considers
in determining the rates applicable to its similar new credit card accounts (1026.59(g)(2)):
a. Except as provided in section 1026.59(g)(2)(iii), determine that the card issuer conducts
reviews described in section 1026.59(a) for rate increases that are imposed as a result of
its review under this paragraph.
b. Except as provided in section 1026.59(g)(2)(iii), note that the card issuer is not required
to conduct reviews in accordance with section 1026.59(a) for any rate increases made
prior to the card issuer’s acquisition of such accounts.
c. Note that if as a result of the card issuer’s review, an account is subject to, or continues to
be subject to, an increased rate as a penalty, or due to the consumer’s delinquency or
default, the requirements of section 1026.59(a) apply.
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act exception: Note that the requirements of Section 1026.59 do
not apply to increases in an APR that was previously decreased pursuant to the
Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (50 U.S.C. app. 527), provided that such a rate increase is
made in accordance with section 1026.55(b)(6). (1026.59(h)(1))
Charged off accounts exception: Note that the requirements of section 1026.59 do not apply
to accounts that the card issuer has charged off in accordance with loan-loss provisions.
(1026.59(h)(2))
CFPB April 2015 TILA 165
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
NOTE: Appendix G to part 1026 is amended by revising Forms G-10(B), G-10(C), G-10(E),
G-17(B), G-17(C), G-18(B), G-18(D), G-18(F), G-18(G), G-20, G-21, G-22, G- 25(A), and
G-25(B).
Administrative Enforcement
1. If there is non-compliance involving understated finance charges or understated APRs
subject to reimbursement under the FFIEC Policy Guide on Reimbursement (policy guide):
a. Document the date on which the administrative enforcement of the TILA policy
statement would apply for reimbursement purposes by determining the date of the
preceding examination.
b. If the non-compliance involves indirect (third-party paper) disclosure errors and affected
consumers have not been reimbursed.
c. Prepare comments, discussing the need for improved internal controls to be included in
the report of examination.
d. Notify your supervisory office for follow up with the regulator that has primary
responsibility for the original creditor.
e. If the non-compliance involves direct credit:
i. Make an initial determination whether the violation is a pattern or practice.
ii. Calculate the reimbursement for the loans or accounts in an expanded sample of the
identified population.
iii. Estimate the total impact on the population based on the expanded sample.
iv. Inform management that reimbursement may be necessary under the law and the policy
guide, and discuss all substantive facts including the sample loans and calculations.
v. Inform management of the financial institution’s options under section 130 of the
TILA for avoiding civil liability and of its option under the policy guide and section
108 (e)(6) of the TILA for avoiding a regulatory agency’s order to reimburse
affected borrowers.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 166
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
HIGH-COST MORTGAGE (Section 1026.32) WORKSHEET
Borrower’s Name: Loan Number:
COVERAGE
Yes No
Is the transaction secured by the consumer’s principal
dwelling?
[§1026.2(a)(19), §1026.32(a)(1)]
If the answer is No, STOP HERE. The transaction is not a high-cost mortgage.
Is the transaction:
1. A reverse mortgage transaction [§1026.32(a)(2)(i)]
2. A transaction to finance the initial construction of a
dwelling [§1026.32(a)(2)(ii)]
3. A transaction originated and financed by a Housing
Finance Agency [§1026.32(a)(2)(iii)]
4. A transaction originated under the USDA’s rural
development section 502 direct loan program
[§1026.32(a)(2)(iv)]
If the answer is Yes to Box 1, 2, 3 or 4, STOP HERE. If No, continue to Test 1, APR.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 167
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
TEST 1 – APR
A. Determine the APR for testing high-cost mortgage coverage:
1. For fixed-rate transactions, calculate the APR using the interest rate
in effect on the date the interest rate for the transaction was set.
2. For transactions where the interest rate varies with an index, use the
greater of the introductory interest rate (if any) or the fully-indexed
rate (i.e., the interest rate that results from adding the maximum
margin permitted at any time during the term of the transaction to
the value of the index rate in effect on the date the interest rate for
the transaction was set).
3. For transactions where the interest rate may or will vary other than
in accordance with an index, such as in a step-rate loan, use the
maximum rate that the applicant may pay during the term of the
transaction.
[§1026.32(a)(3)]
B. Determine the Average Prime Offer Rate (APOR):
Determine the APOR for a comparable transaction as of the last rate
lock on the transaction. Determine the APOR for a HELOC by
identifying the most closely comparable closed-end transaction. APOR
tables are published at http://www.ffiec.gov/ratespread/aportables.htm.
[§1026.32(a)(1)(i) and comments 32(a)(1)(i)-1 through -3]
C. Add one of the following amounts to APOR (Box B), as
applicable:
1. 6.5 percentage points for most first-lien transactions;
2. 8.5 percentage points for first-lien transactions secured by personal
property (e.g., manufactured housing titled as personal property,
RVs, houseboats) where the loan amount is less than $50,000; or
3. 8.5 percentage points for subordinate-lien transactions
[§1026.32(a)(1)(i)(A)-(C)]
Yes No
D. Is Box A greater than Box C?
If Yes, the transaction is a high-cost mortgage. If No, continue to Test 2, Points
and Fees.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 168
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
HIGH-COST MORTGAGE (Section 1026.32) WORKSHEET
TEST 2 – POINTS AND FEES16
STEP 1: Identify all charges payable in connection with the transaction and known
at or before consummation or account opening.
A. Items included in the finance charge (1026.4(a) and (b)), except for the
following:
• Interest, including per-diem interest, and time-price differential;
• All federal or state government-sponsored MIPs, e.g., up-front and annual FHA
premiums, VA funding fees, and USDA guarantee fees;
• All monthly or annual PMI premiums;
• Up-front PMI premiums if the premiums are refundable on a prorated basis and
the refund is automatically issued upon loan satisfaction. However, include any
portion of the PMI premium that exceeds the up-front MIP for FHA loans;
• Bona fide third-party charges not retained by the creditor, loan originator, or an
affiliate of either, unless specifically required to be included under Boxes A-H17;
and
• Up to 1 or 2 bona fide discount points, if eligible.18
[§1026.32(b)(1)(i) (closed-end); §1026.32(b)(2)(i) (open-end)]
Finance Charge Items Amount Subtotals
Origination Charge/Points (unless excluded as bona fide)
Mortgage Broker Fee
Application Fee (if not charged to all applicants)
Loan Administration Fee
Rate-Lock Fee
16 Test 2, Step 1, Boxes A-F and I (i.e., calculating points and fees for closed-end transactions) and Test 2, Step 2,
Box A (i.e., calculating total loan amount for closed-end transactions) are the same tests used for the points and fees
calculation for qualified mortgages.
17 Bona fide third-party charges not retained by creditor or loan originator, or an affiliate of either are excluded,
unless these charges are included as PMI premiums, real estate-related fees, or credit-related insurance premiums.
[§ 1026.32(b)(1)(i)(D)]
18 Discount points are bona fide if two conditions are met: 1) They must buy down the interest rate from the pre-
discount rate, and 2) they must do so by an amount consistent with industry norms. The number of bona fide
discount points that may be excluded depends on the pre-discount rate on the loan. Up to two bona fide discount
points may be excluded if the interest rate before payment of those discount points did not exceed APOR by more
than one percentage point. Up to one bona fide discount point may be excluded if the interest rate before payment of
the discount point did not exceed APOR by more than two percentage points. [§§ 1026.32(b)(1)(i)(E)-(F);
1026.32(b)(3).]
CFPB April 2015 TILA 169
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Commitment Fee
Underwriting Fee
Loan-Level Price Adjustments (LLPAs) (if paid upfront)
Non-Refundable Up-front PMI Premiums in Excess of
Up-front MIP for FHA loans
Other Fees Included in the Finance Charge
Subtotal
B. Loan originator compensation – Include all compensation paid directly or
indirectly by a consumer or creditor to a loan originator (1026.36(a)(1)) that can be
attributed to the transaction at the time the rate is set, but exclude:
• payments by consumers to mortgage brokers that were counted under Box A;
• compensation paid by a creditor or mortgage broker to a loan originator
employee; and
• compensation paid by a manufactured home retailer to its employee.
[§1026.32(b)(1)(ii) (closed-end); §1026.32(b)(2)(ii) (open-end)]
Subtotal
C. Certain non-finance charges under §1026.4(c)(7) – Include fees only if the
amount of the fee is unreasonable, or the creditor receives direct or indirect
compensation from the charge, or the charge is paid to an affiliate of the creditor.
[§1026.32(b)(1)(iii) (closed-end); §1026.32(b)(2)(iii) (open-end)]
Title Examination
Title Insurance
Property Survey
Document Preparation Charge
Notary and Credit Report
Appraisal
Fee for “Initial” Flood Hazard Determination
Pest Inspection
Any Other Fees Under §1026.4(c)(7)
Subtotal
CFPB April 2015 TILA 170
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
D. Premiums or other charges for optional or required insurance payable at or
before consummation or account opening
[§1026.32(b)(1)(iv) (closed-end); §1026.32(b)(2)(iv) (open-end)]
Credit life
Credit disability
Credit unemployment
Credit property
Any other life, accident, health, loss-of-income insurance
(if creditor is a beneficiary)
Debt cancellation or suspension
Subtotal
E. Maximum prepayment penalty
[§1026.32(b)(1)(v) (closed-end); §1026.32(b)(2)(v) (open-end)]
Subtotal
F. For a refinance transaction with the current holder, its servicer, or an affiliate
of either, prepayment penalty paid in connection with terminating prior
transaction
[§1026.32(b)(1)(vi) (closed-end); §1026.32(b)(2)(vi) (open-end)]
Subtotal
G. For open-end transactions, participation fees payable at or before account
opening
[§1026.32(b)(2)(vii)]
Subtotal
H. For open-end transactions, per-transaction fee charged for drawing on credit
line (assume at least one)
[§1026.32(b)(2)(viii)]
Subtotal
I. Total Points & Fees: Add Subtotals for A-F (Closed-End) or
A-H (Open-End)
CFPB April 2015 TILA 171
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
TEST 2 – POINTS AND FEES (continued)
STEP 2: Determine the Total Loan Amount (1026.32(b)(4))
A. Closed-End Transaction
1. Determine the Amount Financed (1026.18(b))
The full amount of principal repayable under the terms of the
o
note or other loan contract
Minus: Prepaid finance charges (1026.2(a)(23))
o
Equals: Amount Financed
o
2. Deduct from the Amount Financed costs that are included in
points and fees under Step 1, Boxes C, D, or F
3. Total Loan Amount (1 minus 2)
B. Open-End Transaction
1. Credit limit for the plan when the account is opened
TEST 2 – POINTS AND FEES (continued)
STEP 3: Perform High-Cost Fee Calculation
Determine which points and fees threshold applies according to the note amount
(threshold cut-offs are adjusted annually for inflation) (1026.32(a)(1)(ii)(A)-(B))
(use the dollar amount corresponding to the year of origination or account opening)
Transactions for $20,000 or more (2014)
A. Calculate 5 percent of the total loan amount
(Step 2, Box A (closed-end) or Box B (open-end))
B. Total Points & Fees (Step 1, Box I)
C. Does Box B exceed Box A? Yes No
Transactions for less than $20,000 (2014)
A. A. Calculate 8 percent of the total loan amount (Step 2,
Box A (closed-end) or Box B (open-end))
B. Annually adjusted dollar amount (1026.32(a)(1)(ii)(B))
2014: $1,000 (use the dollar amount corresponding to the
year of origination or account opening)
C. Total Points & Fees (Step 1, Box I)
D. Does Box C exceed the lesser of Box A or Box B? Yes No
If Yes, the transaction is a high-cost mortgage. If No, continue to Test 3,
CFPB April 2015 TILA 172
CFPB
Examination Procedures TILA
Prepayment Penalty.
TEST 3 – Prepayment Penalty
STEP 1: Determine whether the transaction has a
Yes No
prepayment penalty (1026.32(b)(6)(i)-(ii))
If No, STOP HERE, the transaction is not a high-cost mortgage. If Yes, continue to
Step 2.
STEP 2: Determine the amount and duration of any prepayment penalty19
A. Can prepayment penalties be imposed for longer than 36
months after consummation or account opening?
B. Can prepayment penalties exceed two percent of the
amount prepaid?
If Yes, the transaction is a high-cost mortgage and is in violation of the prohibition
against prepayment penalties for high-cost mortgages (1026.32(d)(6)). If No, the
transaction is not a high-cost mortgage.
19
If the creditor used an accounting method whereby it kept unearned interest charged for any period between
payoff and the end of the month, this would be a prepayment penalty under the rule. In this case, the maximum
prepayment penalty would be the maximum amount of interest that could be charged for the “phantom” (post-
payoff) accrual period. For this purpose, the examiner would need to assume that the consumer makes the final
payoff on the day of the month that yields the longest period of post-payoff interest that could be charged under the
terms of the credit contract and is charged interest for the entire month, and that amount would be the maximum
unearned interest prepayment penalty.
CFPB April 2015 TILA 173
