PART 1002—EQUAL CREDIT OPPOR- et under the provisions of 44 U.S.C. 3501
TUNITY ACT (REGULATION B) et seq. and have been assigned OMB No.
3170–0013.
Sec. (b) Purpose. The purpose of this part
1002.1 Authority, scope and purpose. is to promote the availability of credit
1002.2 Definitions. to all creditworthy applicants without
1002.3 Limited exceptions for certain classes regard to race, color, religion, national
of transactions. origin, sex, marital status, or age (pro-
1002.4 General rules.
vided the applicant has the capacity to
1002.5 Rules concerning requests for infor-
contract); to the fact that all or part of
mation.
1002.6 Rules concerning evaluation of appli- the applicant’s income derives from a
cations. public assistance program; or to the
1002.7 Rules concerning extensions of credit. fact that the applicant has in good
1002.8 Special purpose credit programs. faith exercised any right under the
1002.9 Notifications. Consumer Credit Protection Act. The
1002.10 Furnishing of credit information.
regulation prohibits creditor practices
1002.11 Relation to state law.
1002.12 Record retention. that discriminate on the basis of any of
1002.13 Information for monitoring pur- these factors. The regulation also re-
poses. quires creditors to notify applicants of
1002.14 Rules on providing appraisal reports. action taken on their applications; to
1002.15 Incentives for self-testing and self- report credit history in the names of
correction. both spouses on an account; to retain
1002.16 Enforcement, penalties and liabil-
records of credit applications; to col-
ities.
lect information about the applicant’s
APPENDIX A TO PART 1002—FEDERAL AGEN- race and other personal characteristics
CIESTOBELISTEDINADVERSEACTIONNO-
in applications for certain dwelling-re-
TICES
APPENDIX B TO PART 1002—MODEL APPLICA- lated loans; and to provide applicants
TIONFORMS with copies of appraisal reports used in
APPENDIXC TOPART1002—SAMPLENOTIFICA- connection with credit transactions.
TIONFORMS
APPENDIXD TOPART1002—ISSUANCEOFOFFI- §1002.2 Definitions.
CIALINTERPRETATIONS
SUPPLEMENTI TOPART1002—OFFICIALINTER- For the purposes of this part, unless
PRETATIONS the context indicates otherwise, the
following definitions apply.
AUTHORITY: 12 U.S.C. 5512, 5581; 15 U.S.C.
1691b. (a) Account means an extension of
credit. When employed in relation to
SOURCE: 76 FR 79445, Dec. 21, 2011, unless
an account, the word use refers only to
otherwise noted.
open-end credit.
§1002.1 Authority, scope and purpose. (b) Act means the Equal Credit Op-
portunity Act (Title VII of the Con-
(a) Authority and scope. This part,
sumer Credit Protection Act).
known as Regulation B, is issued by
the Bureau of Consumer Financial Pro- (c) Adverse action. (1) The term
tection (Bureau) pursuant to Title VII means:
(Equal Credit Opportunity Act) of the (i) A refusal to grant credit in sub-
Consumer Credit Protection Act, as stantially the amount or on substan-
amended (15 U.S.C. 1601 et seq.). Except tially the terms requested in an appli-
as otherwise provided herein, this part cation unless the creditor makes a
applies to all persons who are credi- counteroffer (to grant credit in a dif-
tors, as defined in §1002.2(l), other than ferent amount or on other terms) and
a person excluded from coverage of this the applicant uses or expressly accepts
part by section 1029 of the Consumer the credit offered;
Financial Protection Act of 2010, Title (ii) A termination of an account or
X of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Re- an unfavorable change in the terms of
form and Consumer Protection Act, an account that does not affect all or
Public Law 111–203, 124 Stat. 1376. Infor- substantially all of a class of the credi-
mation collection requirements con- tor’s accounts; or
tained in this part have been approved (iii) A refusal to increase the amount
by the Office of Management and Budg- of credit available to an applicant who
87
§1002.2 12 CFR Ch. X (1–1–12 Edition)
has made an application for an in- quested (including, but not limited to,
crease. credit reports, any additional informa-
(2) The term does not include: tion requested from the applicant, and
(i) A change in the terms of an ac- any approvals or reports by govern-
count expressly agreed to by an appli- mental agencies or other persons that
cant; are necessary to guarantee, insure, or
(ii) Any action or forbearance relat- provide security for the credit or col-
ing to an account taken in connection lateral). The creditor shall exercise
with inactivity, default, or delinquency reasonable diligence in obtaining such
as to that account; information.
(iii) A refusal or failure to authorize (g) Business credit refers to extensions
an account transaction at point of sale of credit primarily for business or com-
or loan, except when the refusal is a mercial (including agricultural) pur-
termination or an unfavorable change poses, but excluding extensions of cred-
in the terms of an account that does it of the types described in §§1002.3(a)–
not affect all or substantially all of a (d).
class of the creditor’s accounts, or
(h) Consumer credit means credit ex-
when the refusal is a denial of an appli-
tended to a natural person primarily
cation for an increase in the amount of
for personal, family, or household pur-
credit available under the account;
poses.
(iv) A refusal to extend credit be-
(i) Contractually liable means ex-
cause applicable law prohibits the cred-
pressly obligated to repay all debts
itor from extending the credit re-
arising on an account by reason of an
quested; or
agreement to that effect.
(v) A refusal to extend credit because
(j) Credit means the right granted by
the creditor does not offer the type of
a creditor to an applicant to defer pay-
credit or credit plan requested.
ment of a debt, incur debt and defer its
(3) An action that falls within the
payment, or purchase property or serv-
definition of both paragraphs (c)(1) and
ices and defer payment therefor.
(c)(2) of this section is governed by
paragraph (c)(2) of this section. (k) Credit card means any card, plate,
(d) Age refers only to the age of nat- coupon book, or other single credit de-
ural persons and means the number of vice that may be used from time to
fully elapsed years from the date of an time to obtain money, property, or
applicant’s birth. services on credit.
(e) Applicant means any person who (l) Creditor means a person who, in
requests or who has received an exten- the ordinary course of business, regu-
sion of credit from a creditor, and in- larly participates in a credit decision,
cludes any person who is or may be- including setting the terms of the cred-
come contractually liable regarding an it. The term creditor includes a credi-
extension of credit. For purposes of tor’s assignee, transferee, or subrogee
§1002.7(d), the term includes guaran- who so participates. For purposes of
tors, sureties, endorsers, and similar §§1002.4(a) and (b), the term creditor
parties. also includes a person who, in the ordi-
(f) Application means an oral or writ- nary course of business, regularly re-
ten request for an extension of credit fers applicants or prospective appli-
that is made in accordance with proce- cants to creditors, or selects or offers
dures used by a creditor for the type of to select creditors to whom requests
credit requested. The term application for credit may be made. A person is not
does not include the use of an account a creditor regarding any violation of
or line of credit to obtain an amount of the Act or this part committed by an-
credit that is within a previously es- other creditor unless the person knew
tablished credit limit. A completed ap- or had reasonable notice of the act,
plication means an application in con- policy, or practice that constituted the
nection with which a creditor has re- violation before becoming involved in
ceived all the information that the the credit transaction. The term does
creditor regularly obtains and con- not include a person whose only par-
siders in evaluating applications for ticipation in a credit transaction in-
the amount and type of credit re- volves honoring a credit card.
88
Bur. of Consumer Financial Protection §1002.2
(m) Credit transaction means every as- the development process to validate
pect of an applicant’s dealings with a the system based on its own credit ex-
creditor regarding an application for perience in accordance with paragraph
credit or an existing extension of credit (p)(1) of this section, the system must
(including, but not limited to, informa- be validated when sufficient credit ex-
tion requirements; investigation proce- perience becomes available. A system
dures; standards of creditworthiness; that fails this validity test is no longer
terms of credit; furnishing of credit in- an empirically derived, demonstrably
formation; revocation, alteration, or and statistically sound, credit scoring
termination of credit; and collection system for that creditor.
procedures). (q) Extend credit and extension of credit
(n) Discriminate against an applicant mean the granting of credit in any
means to treat an applicant less favor- form (including, but not limited to,
ably than other applicants. credit granted in addition to any exist-
(o) Elderly means age 62 or older. ing credit or credit limit; credit grant-
(p) Empirically derived and other credit ed pursuant to an open-end credit plan;
scoring systems. (1) A credit scoring sys- the refinancing or other renewal of
tem is a system that evaluates an appli- credit, including the issuance of a new
cant’s creditworthiness mechanically, credit card in place of an expiring cred-
based on key attributes of the appli- it card or in substitution for an exist-
cant and aspects of the transaction, ing credit card; the consolidation of
and that determines, alone or in con- two or more obligations; or the con-
junction with an evaluation of addi- tinuance of existing credit without any
tional information about the applicant, special effort to collect at or after ma-
whether an applicant is deemed credit- turity).
worthy. To qualify as an empirically de- (r) Good faith means honesty in fact
rived, demonstrably and statistically in the conduct or transaction.
sound, credit scoring system, the system (s) Inadvertent error means a mechan-
must be: ical, electronic, or clerical error that a
(i) Based on data that are derived creditor demonstrates was not inten-
from an empirical comparison of sam- tional and occurred notwithstanding
ple groups or the population of credit- the maintenance of procedures reason-
worthy and non-creditworthy appli- ably adapted to avoid such errors.
cants who applied for credit within a (t) Judgmental system of evaluating ap-
reasonable preceding period of time; plicants means any system for evalu-
(ii) Developed for the purpose of eval- ating the creditworthiness of an appli-
uating the creditworthiness of appli- cant other than an empirically derived,
cants with respect to the legitimate demonstrably and statistically sound,
business interests of the creditor uti- credit scoring system.
lizing the system (including, but not (u) Marital status means the state of
limited to, minimizing bad debt losses being unmarried, married, or sepa-
and operating expenses in accordance rated, as defined by applicable state
with the creditor’s business judgment); law. The term ‘‘unmarried’’ includes
(iii) Developed and validated using persons who are single, divorced, or
accepted statistical principles and widowed.
methodology; and (v) Negative factor or value, in relation
(iv) Periodically revalidated by the to the age of elderly applicants, means
use of appropriate statistical principles utilizing a factor, value, or weight that
and methodology and adjusted as nec- is less favorable regarding elderly ap-
essary to maintain predictive ability. plicants than the creditor’s experience
(2) A creditor may use an empirically warrants or is less favorable than the
derived, demonstrably and statistically factor, value, or weight assigned to the
sound, credit scoring system obtained class of applicants that are not classi-
from another person or may obtain fied as elderly and are most favored by
credit experience from which to de- a creditor on the basis of age.
velop such a system. Any such system (w) Open-end credit means credit ex-
must satisfy the criteria set forth in tended under a plan in which a creditor
paragraph (p)(1)(i) through (iv) of this may permit an applicant to make pur-
section; if the creditor is unable during chases or obtain loans from time to
89
§1002.3 12 CFR Ch. X (1–1–12 Edition)
time directly from the creditor or indi- as a broker or dealer under the Securi-
rectly by use of a credit card, check, or ties Exchange Act of 1934.
other device. (2) Exceptions. The following provi-
(x) Person means a natural person, sions of this part do not apply to secu-
corporation, government or govern- rities credit:
mental subdivision or agency, trust, es- (i) Section 1002.5(b) concerning infor-
tate, partnership, cooperative, or asso- mation about the sex of an applicant;
ciation. (ii) Section 1002.5(c) concerning infor-
(y) Pertinent element of creditworthi- mation about a spouse or former
ness, in relation to a judgmental sys- spouse;
tem of evaluating applicants, means (iii) Section 1002.5(d)(1) concerning
any information about applicants that information about marital status;
a creditor obtains and considers and (iv) Section 1002.7(b) relating to des-
that has a demonstrable relationship ignation of name to the extent nec-
to a determination of creditworthiness. essary to comply with rules regarding
(z) Prohibited basis means race, color, an account in which a broker or dealer
religion, national origin, sex, marital has an interest, or rules regarding the
status, or age (provided that the appli- aggregation of accounts of spouses to
cant has the capacity to enter into a determine controlling interests, bene-
binding contract); the fact that all or ficial interests, beneficial ownership,
part of the applicant’s income derives or purchase limitations and restric-
from any public assistance program; or tions;
the fact that the applicant has in good (v) Section 1002.7(c) relating to action
faith exercised any right under the concerning open-end accounts, to the
Consumer Credit Protection Act or any extent the action taken is on the basis
state law upon which an exemption has of a change of name or marital status;
been granted by the Bureau. (vi) Section 1002.7(d) relating to the
(aa) State means any state, the Dis- signature of a spouse or other person;
trict of Columbia, the Commonwealth (vii) Section 1002.10 relating to fur-
of Puerto Rico, or any territory or pos- nishing of credit information; and
session of the United States. (viii) Section 1002.12(b) relating to
record retention.
§1002.3 Limited exceptions for certain (c) Incidental credit—(1) Definition. In-
classes of transactions. cidental credit refers to extensions of
(a) Public utilities credit—(1) Defini- consumer credit other than the types
tion. Public utilities credit refers to ex- described in paragraphs (a) and (b) of
tensions of credit that involve public this section:
utility services provided through pipe, (i) That are not made pursuant to the
wire, or other connected facilities, or terms of a credit card account;
radio or similar transmission (includ- (ii) That are not subject to a finance
ing extensions of such facilities), if the charge (as defined in Regulation Z, 12
charges for service, delayed payment, CFR 1026.4); and
and any discount for prompt payment (iii) That are not payable by agree-
are filed with or regulated by a govern- ment in more than four installments.
ment unit. (2) Exceptions. The following provi-
(2) Exceptions. The following provi- sions of this part do not apply to inci-
sions of this part do not apply to public dental credit:
utilities credit: (i) Section 1002.5(b) concerning infor-
(i) Section 1002.5(d)(1) concerning in- mation about the sex of an applicant,
formation about marital status; and but only to the extent necessary for
(ii) Section 1002.12(b) relating to medical records or similar purposes;
record retention. (ii) Section 1002.5(c) concerning infor-
(b) Securities credit—(1) Definition. Se- mation about a spouse or former
curities credit refers to extensions of spouse;
credit subject to regulation under sec- (iii) Section 1002.5(d)(1) concerning
tion 7 of the Securities Exchange Act information about marital status;
of 1934 or extensions of credit by a (iv) Section 1002.5(d)(2) concerning in-
broker or dealer subject to regulation formation about income derived from
90
