Federal Fair Lending Regulations and Statutes
Equal Credit Opportunity (Regulation B)
Background a prohibited basis. In addition, a bank may not use
prescreening tactics likely to discourage potential
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) of 1974, applicants on a prohibited basis. Instructions to
which is implemented by the Board’s Regulation B, loan officers or brokers to use scripts, rate quotes,
applies to all creditors. The statute requires finan­ or other means to discourage minority applicants
cial institutions and other firms engaged in the from applying for credit are also prohibited.
extension of credit to ‘‘make credit equally available
The prohibition against discouraging applicants
to all creditworthy customers without regard to sex
applies to in-person oral and telephone inquiries as
or marital status.’’ Moreover, the statute makes it
well as to written applications. Lending officers
unlawful for ‘‘any creditor to discriminate against
must refrain from requesting prohibited information
any applicant with respect to any aspect of a credit
in conversations with applicants during the pre­
transaction (1) on the basis of race, color, religion,
interview phase (that is, before the application is
national origin, sex or marital status, or age
taken) as well as when taking the written application.
(provided the applicant has the capacity to con­
tract); (2) because all or part of the applicant’s To prevent discrimination in the credit-granting
income derives from any public assistance pro­ process, the regulation imposes a delicate balance
gram; or (3) because the applicant has in good between the creditor’s need to know as much as
faith exercised any right under the Consumer possible about a prospective borrower and the
Credit Protection Act.’’ In keeping with the broad borrower’s right not to disclose information irrel­
reach of the prohibition, the regulation covers evant to the credit transaction. To this end, the
creditor activities before, during, and after the regulation prescribes rules for taking, evaluating,
extension of credit. and acting on applications as well as rules for
furnishing and maintaining credit information.
Under the ECOA, the Federal Reserve Board is
responsible for drafting and interpreting the imple­
menting regulation. Enforcement responsibility, how­
Rules for Taking Applications—
ever, rests with a creditor’s functional regulator or,
Section 202.5
for any category not so assigned, with the Federal
Trade Commission. A synopsis of some of the more
Regulation B prohibits creditors from requesting
important points of Regulation B follows.
and collecting specific personal information about
an applicant that has no bearing on the applicant’s
Prohibited Practices ability or willingness to repay the credit requested
and could be used to discriminate against the
Regulation B contains two basic and comprehen­ applicant.
sive prohibitions against discriminatory lending
practices (section 202.4):
Applicant Characteristics
• A creditor shall not discriminate against an
applicant on a prohibited basis regarding any Creditors may not request or collect information
aspect of a credit transaction. about an applicant’s race, color, religion, national
origin, or sex. Exceptions to this rule generally
• A creditor shall not make any oral or written
involve situations in which the information is
statement, in advertising or otherwise, to appli­
necessary to test for compliance with fair lending
cants or prospective applicants that would
rules or is required by a state or federal regulatory
discourage, on a prohibited basis, a reasonable
agency or other government entity for a particular
person from making or pursuing an application.
purpose, such as to determine eligibility for a
Note that the regulation is concerned not only with particular program. For example, a creditor may
the treatment of persons who have initiated the request prohibited information
application process, but also with lender behavior
• In connection with a self-test being conducted
before the application is even taken. Lending
by the creditor (provided that the self-test meets
officers and employees must be careful to take no
certain requirements)
action that would, on a prohibited basis, discour­
age anyone from applying for a loan. For example, • For monitoring purposes in relation to credit
a bank may not advertise its credit services and secured by real estate
practices in ways that would tend to encourage • To determine an applicant’s eligibility for special-
some types of borrowers and discourage others on purpose credit programs
Consumer Compliance Handbook Reg. B • 1 (1/06)
Fair Lending: Equal Credit Opportunity
Information about a Spouse or Alimony, Child Support, or Separate
Former Spouse (§ 202.5(c)) Maintenance Income (§ 202.5(d)(2))
A bank may not request information about an A bank may ask if an applicant is receiving alimony,
applicant’s spouse or former spouse except under child support, or separate maintenance payments.
the following circumstances: However, the bank must first disclose to the
applicant that such income need not be revealed
• The non-applicant spouse will be a user of or
unless the applicant wishes to rely on that income
joint obligor on the account. (Note: The term
in the determination of creditworthiness. An appro­
‘‘user’’ applies only to open-end accounts.)
priate notice to that effect must be given whenever
• The non-applicant spouse will be contractually the bank makes a general request concerning
liable on the account. income and the source of that income. Therefore, a
• The applicant is relying on the spouse’s income, bank either must ask questions designed to solicit
at least in part, as a source of repayment. only information about specific income (for exam­
ple, ‘‘salary,’’ ‘‘wages,’’ ‘‘employment,’’ or other
• The applicant resides in a community property
specified categories of income) or must state that
state, or the property upon which the applicant is
disclosure of alimony, child support, or separate
relying as a basis for repayment of the credit
maintenance payments is not required.
requested is located in such a state.
• The applicant is relying on alimony, child sup­
port, or separate maintenance income as a basis Residency and Immigration Status
for obtaining the credit. (§ 202.5(e))
The bank may inquire about the applicant’s perma­
Marital status nent residence and immigration status in order to
(§§ 202.5(d)(1) and 202.5(d)(3)) determine creditworthiness.
Individual Credit
Rules for Evaluating Applications—
When an applicant applies for individual credit, the Section 202.6
bank may not ask the applicant’s marital status.
There are two exceptions to this rule: General Rule
• If the credit transaction is to be secured, the A creditor may consider any information in evaluat­
bank may ask the applicant’s marital status. (This ing applicants, so long as the use of the information
information may be necessary to determine what does not have the intent or the effect of discrimi­
would be required to gain access to the collateral nating against an applicant on a prohibited basis.
in the event of default.) Generally, a creditor may not
• If the applicant either resides in a community
• Consider any of the prohibited bases, including
property state or lists assets to support the debt
age (providing the applicant is old enough,
that are located in such a state, the bank may
under state law, to enter into a binding contract)
ask the applicant’s marital status. (In community
and the receipt of public assistance
property states, assets owned by a married
• Use childbearing or childrearing information,
individual may also be owned by the spouse,
assumptions, or statistics to determine whether
thus complicating the accessibility of the collat­
an applicant’s income may be interrupted or
eral in the event of default.)
decreased
• Consider whether there is a telephone listing in
Joint Credit the applicant’s name (but the creditor may
consider whether there is a telephone in the
When a request for credit is joint (made by two or
applicant’s home)
more individuals who will be primarily liable), the
bank may ask the applicant’s marital status, • Discount or exclude part-time income from an
regardless of whether the credit is to be secured or applicant or the spouse of an applicant
unsecured, but may use only the terms ‘‘married,’’
‘‘unmarried,’’ and ‘‘separated.’’ This requirement
Systems for Analyzing Credit
applies to oral as well as written requests for marital
status information. ‘‘Unmarried’’ may be defined to Regulation B neither requires nor endorses any
include divorced, widowed, or never married, but particular method of credit analysis. Creditors may
the application must not be structured in such a use traditional methods, such as judgmental sys­
way as to encourage the applicant to distinguish tems that rely on a credit officer’s subjective
among these. evaluation of an applicant’s creditworthiness, or
2 (1/06) • Reg. B Consumer Compliance Handbook
Fair Lending: Equal Credit Opportunity
they may use more-objective, statistically devel­ The subsections dealing with signatures have
oped techniques such as credit scoring. been, for many creditors, some of the most
commonly misunderstood provisions of Regulation
B. For that reason, and to increase examiners’
Credit Scoring Systems
ability to facilitate lender compliance and deter­
Section 202.2(p) of Regulation B prescribes the mine whether a particular signature practice is or is
standards that a credit scoring system must meet not a violation of the regulation, additional guid­
to qualify as an ‘‘empirically derived, demonstrably ance is provided in CA Letter 02-1, Clarifying
and statistically sound, credit system.’’ All forms of Signature Provisions under Sec. 202.7(d) of Regu­
credit analysis that do not meet the standards are
lation B. Examiners should consult that CA letter
automatically classified as ‘‘judgmental’’ systems.
when assessing the level of a bank’s compliance
This distinction is important because creditors that with the signature requirements.
use a ‘‘demonstrably and statistically sound’’
system may take applicant age directly into
Special-Purpose Credit Programs—
account as a predictive variable, whereas judgmen­
tal systems may not. Section 202.8
The ECOA and Regulation B allow creditors to
Judgmental Evaluation Systems establish special-purpose credit programs for appli­
cants who meet certain eligibility requirements.
Any system other than one that is empirically
Generally, these programs target an economically
derived and demonstrably and statistically sound
disadvantaged class of individuals and are autho­
is a judgmental system (including any credit
rized by federal or state law. Some are offered by
scoring system that does not meet the prescribed
not-for-profit organizations that meet certain IRS
technical standards). Such a system may not take
guidelines, and some by for-profit organizations
applicant age directly into account in evaluating
that meet specific tests outlined in section 202.8.
creditworthiness. The act and the regulation do,
however, permit a creditor to consider the appli­ Experience has shown that creditors rarely seek
cant’s age for the purpose of evaluating other to use section 202.8. Additionally, as stated in the
applicant information that has a demonstrable commentary (supplement I to the regulation), the
relationship to creditworthiness. Federal Reserve ‘‘does not determine whether
individual programs qualify for special-purpose
credit status, or whether a particular program
Rules for Extensions of Credit— benefits an ‘economically disadvantaged class of
Section 202.7 persons.’ The agency or creditor administering or
offering the loan program must make these deci­
Section 202.7 of Regulation B provides a set of sions regarding the status of its program.’’ Conse­
rules proscribing certain discriminatory practices quently, examiners are encouraged, if an issue
regarding the creation and continuation of credit arises regarding such a program, to consult with
accounts. Board staff.
Signature Requirements Notifications—Section 202.9
The primary purpose of the signature requirements A bank must notify an applicant of action taken on
is to permit creditworthy individuals (particularly the applicant’s request for credit, whether favor­
women) to obtain credit on their own. Two general able or adverse, within thirty days after receiving a
rules apply: completed application. Notice of approval may be
expressly stated or implied (for example, the bank
• A bank may not require a signature other than the
may give the applicant the credit card, money,
applicant’s or joint applicant’s if under the bank’s
property, or services for which the applicant
standards of creditworthiness the applicant quali­
applied). Notification of adverse action taken on an
fies for the amount and terms of the credit
existing account must also be made within thirty
requested.
days.
• A bank has more latitude in seeking signatures
on instruments necessary to reach property used Under at least two circumstances, the bank need
as security, or in support of the customer’s not comply with the thirty-day notification rule:
creditworthiness, than it has in obtaining the • The bank must notify an applicant of adverse
signatures of persons other than the applicant on action within ninety days after making a counter­
documents that establish the contractual obliga­ offer unless the applicant accepts or uses the
tion to repay. credit during that time.
Consumer Compliance Handbook Reg. B • 3 (1/06)
Fair Lending: Equal Credit Opportunity
• The bank may not have to notify an applicant of business had gross revenues of $1,000,000 or less
adverse action if the application was incomplete in the preceding fiscal year. Extensions of trade
and the bank sent the applicant a notice of credit, credit incident to a factoring agreement, and
incompleteness that met certain requirements similar types of credit are subject to the same rules
set forth in section 202.9(c). as those that apply to businesses that had gross
revenues of more than $1,000,000.
Adverse Action Notice (§ 202.9(a)(2)) Generally, a bank must comply with the same
notification requirements for business credit appli­
A notification of adverse action must be in writing cants with gross revenues of $1,000,000 or less as
and must contain certain information, including the it does for consumer credit applicants. However,
name and address of the bank and the nature of the the bank has more options when dealing with these
action that was taken. In addition, the bank must business credit applicants. First, the bank may tell
provide an ECOA notice that includes the identity of the business credit applicant orally of the action
the federal agency responsible for enforcing com­ taken. Second, if the bank chooses to provide a
pliance with the act for that bank. This notice is notice informing the business credit applicant of
generally included on the notification of adverse the right to request the reason for action taken, it
action. The bank must also either provide the may, rather than disclose the reason itself, provide
applicant with the specific principal reason for the the notice at the time of application. If the bank
action taken or disclose that the applicant has the chooses to inform the applicant of the right to
right to request the reason(s) for denial within sixty request a reason, however, it must provide a
days of receipt of the bank’s notification, along with disclosure with an ECOA notice that is in retainable
the name, address, and telephone number of the form and that gives the applicant the same
person who can provide the specific reason(s) for information that must be provided to consumer
the adverse action. The reason may be given orally credit applicants when this option is used (see
if the bank also advises the applicant of the right to section 202.9(a)2)(ii)). Finally, if the application was
obtain the reason in writing upon request. made entirely over the phone, the bank may
provide an oral statement of action taken and of the
Incomplete Applications (§ 202.9(c)) applicant’s right to a statement of reasons for
adverse action.
When a bank receives an incomplete application, it
The notification requirements for business credit
may send one of two alternative notifications to the
applicants with gross revenues of more than
applicant. One is a notice of adverse action; the
$1,000,000 are relatively simple. The bank must
other is a notice of incompleteness. The notice of
notify the applicant of the action taken within a
incompleteness must be in writing and must
reasonable time period. The notice may be oral or
specify the information the bank needs if it is to
in writing; a written statement of the reasons for
consider the application; it must also provide a
adverse action and the ECOA notice need be
reasonable period of time for the applicant to
provided only if the applicant makes a written
furnish the missing information.
request within sixty days of the bank’s notification
of the action taken.
Applications Submitted
through a Third Party (§ 202.9(g))
Designation of Accounts—
When more than one bank is involved in a Section 202.10(a)
transaction and adverse action is taken with
respect to the application for credit by all the banks A creditor that furnishes credit information to a
involved, each bank that took such action must consumer reporting agency must designate
provide a notice of action taken. The notification
• Any new account to reflect the participation of
may be given by a third party; however, the notice
both spouses if the applicant’s spouse is permit­
must disclose the identity of each bank on whose
ted to use or is contractually liable on the
behalf the notice is given. If one of the banks
account
approves the application, the banks that took
• Any existing account to reflect the participation
adverse action need not provide notification.
of both spouses within ninety days after receiv­
ing a written request to do so from one of the
Notification to Business Credit spouses
Applicants (§ 202.9(a)(3))
If a creditor furnishes credit information to a
The notification requirements for business credit consumer reporting agency, the creditor must
applicants are different from those for consumer furnish the information in the name of the spouse
credit applicants and are more extensive if the about whom the information was requested.
4 (1/06) • Reg. B Consumer Compliance Handbook
Fair Lending: Equal Credit Opportunity
Record Retention—Section 202.12 Incentives for Self-Testing and
Self-Correction—Section 202.15
Applications
A self-test, as discussed in section 202.15 of
In general, a bank must preserve all written or
Regulation B, must meet two criteria. First, it must
recorded information connected with an applica­
be a program, practice, or study that a lender
tion for twenty-five months (twelve months for
designs and uses specifically to determine the
business credit) after the date on which the bank
extent or effectiveness of its compliance with the
informed the applicant of action taken on an
regulation. Second, the results of the self-test must
application or of incompleteness of an application.
create data or factual information that is otherwise
not available and cannot be derived from loan or
application files or other records related to credit
Prohibited Information
transactions. The findings of a self-test that is
conducted voluntarily by a creditor and that
A bank may retain information in its files that it may
meets the conditions set forth in section 202.15
not use in evaluating applications. However, the
are privileged against discovery or use by (1) a
information must have been obtained inadvertently
government agency in any examination or investi­
or in accordance with federal or state law or
gation related to the ECOA or Regulation B or (2) a
regulation.
government agency or an applicant in any legal
proceeding involving an alleged violation of the
ECOA or Regulation B. Privileged information
Existing Accounts
includes the report or results of the test; data or
A bank must preserve any written or recorded other information created by the test; and any
information concerning adverse action on an analysis, opinions, or conclusions regarding the
existing account as well as any written statement results of the test. The privilege does not cover
submitted by the applicant alleging a violation of information about whether a test was conducted;
the ECOA or Regulation B. This evidence must be the methodology, scope, time period, or dates
kept for twenty-five months (twelve months for covered by the test; loan or application files or
business credit). other business records; and information derived
from such files and records, even if aggregated,
summarized, or reorganized.
Prescreened Solicitations
Requirements for Electronic
The twenty-five-month retention rule also applies
when a bank makes an offer of credit to potential Communication—Section 202.16
customers. In such cases, the bank must retain for
Subject to the specific provisions of section 202.16
twenty-five months following the date of the solici­
regarding disclosures, consumer consent, redeliv­
tation
ery, electronic signatures, and exceptions, a credi­
• The text of any prescreened solicitation, tor may provide by electronic communication any
• The list of criteria the creditor used to select disclosure otherwise required by the regulation to
potential recipients of the solicitation, and be in writing.
• Any correspondence related to complaints (for­
mal or informal) about the solicitation. Enforcement, Penalties, and
Liabilities—Section 202.17
Rules for Providing Appraisal In addition to actual damages, Regulation B
provides for punitive damages of up to $10,000 in
Reports—Section 202.14
individual lawsuits and up to the lesser of $500,000
or 1 percent of the bank’s net worth in class action
Regulation B requires that banks provide a copy of
suits. Successful complainants are also entitled to
the appraisal report used in connection with an
an award of court costs and attorney’s fees.
application for credit to be secured by a lien on a
dwelling. A bank may provide the copy either A bank is not liable for failure to comply with the
routinely (whether or not credit is granted or the notification requirements of section 202.9 if the
application is withdrawn) or upon an applicant’s failure was caused by an inadvertent error and the
written request. If the bank provides an appraisal bank, after discovering the error, (1) corrects the
report only upon request, it must inform the error as soon as possible and (2) begins compli­
applicant in writing of the right to receive a copy of ance with the requirements of the regulation.
the report. ‘‘Inadvertent errors’’ include mechanical, elec-
Consumer Compliance Handbook Reg. B • 5 (1/06)
Fair Lending: Equal Credit Opportunity
tronic, and clerical errors that the bank can show 202.12, and 202.13 is not considered a violation if it
(1) were not intentional and (2) occurred despite results from an inadvertent error and the bank takes
the fact that the bank maintains procedures the corrective action noted above. Errors involving
reasonably adapted to avoid such errors. Similarly, sections 202.12 and 202.13 may be corrected
failure to comply with sections 202.6(b)(6), 202.10, prospectively by the bank.
6 (1/06) • Reg. B Consumer Compliance Handbook
