BANKWISE
>>>>
YOUR RIGHTS SIMPLIFIED
EQUAL CREDIT OPPORTUNITY ACT
(REGULATION B)
KEY PROTECTIONS
The Equal Credit Opportunity Act
(ECOA) applies to any extension of
credit and prohibits discrimination
Nondiscrimination
in any aspect of a credit transaction
The regulation prohibits discrimination regarding
(including oral and written loan any aspect of a credit transaction based on race,
color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status,
applications). The ECOA has been
age, receipt of public assistance, or exercising
amended several times since its rights under the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
enactment in 1974.
Adverse Action Notifications
Creditors must inform applicants of actions taken
Regulation B outlines the requirements
on their credit applications within 30 days. If credit
under ECOA. is denied, creditors must give specific reasons or
inform applicants of their right to get the reasons
for the denial.
BANKWISE is a series of informational resources developed by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) to
help consumers understand the federal consumer protection laws and regulations that govern financial institutions.
Protections and requirements for business purposes may vary.
BANK REQUIREMENTS
Financial institutions are required to comply with ECOA
and its implementing regulation. In addition to the
protections listed under the KEY PROTECTIONS section:
BANKS MUST: RESOURCES
• collect demographic information in connection
with a request for credit secured by a dwelling.
Information such as race, ethnicity, sex, marital
status, and age is collected to monitor compliance
Read: Learn more about ECOA.
with fair lending laws.
• keep records related to consumer credit applications
and decisions for at least 25 months.
Get assistance: The OCC’s
HelpWithMyBank.gov has answers to
questions on a range of banking topics,
BANKS MAY NOT:
including credit scores and reports,
• discriminate against applicants based on race,
and information on how customers
color, religion, national origin, sex, marital status, age
(provided the applicant has the capacity to contract), may file a complaint against an
receipt of public assistance, or exercise of rights OCC-supervised institution.
under the Consumer Credit Protection Act.
• discourage applications from anyone applying for
Find who regulates your financial
credit based on the prohibited factors.
institution: Visit HelpWithMyBank.gov
• require applicants to disclose childbearing
to contact your bank’s regulator
plans or consider an applicant’s plans to have or
for assistance. The National Credit
raise children.
Union Administration regulates most
• assign different credit terms to the loan unless
credit unions.
justified by an applicant’s creditworthiness or other
legitimate criteria.
• require a spouse’s signature on an application
unless the spouse is a joint applicant or state law
requires it.
• generally, collect demographic information about
the race, color, religion, national origin, or sex of an
applicant or any other person in connection with a
credit transaction not secured by a dwelling, unless
in connection with self-testing or a special purpose Promoting a Safe, Sound, and
credit program.
Fair Federal Banking System
BANKS MAY (optional)
• conduct voluntary self-testing programs to
monitor and ensure compliance with fair lending
laws, as long as the results are not used in a The Office of the Comptroller of the Currency’s
discriminatory manner. (OCC) mission is to ensure that national banks
and federal savings associations operate in a
• offer credit counseling to applicants or customers
safe and sound manner, provide fair access to
as a service to help improve creditworthiness.
financial services, treat customers fairly, and
• provide additional notices or disclosures beyond comply with applicable laws and regulations.
what is required to ensure clarity and transparency,
such as notifying a customer of changes to their
credit report that could affect their credit standing. Disclaimer: This fact sheet is for informational purposes only and
does not constitute legal advice. The terms “bank” and “banks”
• establish a special purpose credit program that
generally refer to national banks, federal savings associations, and
meets ECOA’s standards to meet the credit needs of
federal branches or agencies of foreign banking organizations that
specified classes of people.
are OCC-regulated. For specific legal questions or concerns, consult
with a qualified attorney.
